Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems∗
Martin C. Cooper1 and Stanislav Živný2

1       IRIT, University of Toulouse III, Toulouse, France
        cooper@irit.fr
2       Dept. of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
        standa.zivny@cs.ox.ac.uk


        Abstract
We present a survey of complexity results for hybrid constraint satisfaction problems (CSPs)
and valued constraint satisfaction problems (VCSPs). These are classes of (V)CSPs defined by
restrictions that are not exclusively language-based or structure-based.

1998 ACM Subject Classification F.4.1 Mathematical Logic, G.2.1 Combinatorics, G.2.2 Graph
Theory, F.1.3 Complexity Measures and Classes, G.1.6 Optimization

Keywords and phrases Constraint satisfaction problems, Optimisation, Tractability

Digital Object Identifier 10.4230/DFU.Vol7.15301.113


    1    Introduction
A fundamental challenge in computer science is to map out the frontier of the complexity
class P, the class of decision problems that can be solved in polynomial time. The constraint
satisfaction problem (CSP) is a generic combinatorial problem which includes in a natural
way many important NP-complete problems such as SAT or graph-colouring. The valued
constraint satisfaction problem (VCSP) can be seen as an even richer language than the CSP
since it provides a general framework in which to express both constraint satisfaction problems
and constrained optimisation problems. The identification of tractable classes of generic
problems, such as the (V)CSP, has led not only to a deeper understanding of tractability, but
also to wider application areas of well-known algorithms. Indeed, recent research has shown
that very few algorithmic techniques suffice to solve all tractable language-based classes of
(V)CSPs [1, 35, 40].
    Many real-world problems can be modelled as classical and well-studied NP-complete
problems, such as SAT, CSP or VCSP. This has the advantage that generic solvers exist
which are efficient on many instances, but has the disadvantage of not taking into account
specificities of the particular problem which could perhaps guarantee the existence of a
polynomial-time algorithm. Obvious specificities include the type of constraints or cost
functions that can occur or the structure of the hypergraph of constraint scopes. Much
research effort has been devoted to identifying tractable language-based classes [2, 5] or
tractable structural classes [32], with many notable successes. However, it is natural to ask
whether interesting classes of instances can be defined in other ways.


∗
    The authors were supported by EPSRC grant EP/L021226/1. Stanislav Živný was supported by a
    Royal Society University Research Fellowship. This work was partly done while the second author was
    visiting the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing at UC Berkeley. This project has received
    funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research
    and innovation programme (grant agreement No 714532). The paper reflects only the authors’ views
    and not the views of the ERC or the European Commission. The European Union is not liable for any
    use that may be made of the information contained therein.
            © Martin C. Cooper and Stanislav Živný;
            licensed under Creative Commons License BY
The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Approximability. Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, Volume 7, ISBN
978-3-95977-003-3.
Editors: Andrei Krokhin and Stanislav Živný; pp. 113–135
                      Dagstuhl Publishing
                      Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, Germany
114   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


          One way of defining classes of instances is by simultaneously placing restrictions both
      on the language of possible constraints (or cost functions) and on the structure of the
      hypergraph of constraint (cost function) scopes. Such classes are known as hybrid classes,
      and by extension all classes which are not exclusively language-based nor structure-based are
      also known as hybrid [24]. This larger meaning is the one we apply in this chapter.
          As an example of a hybrid tractable class, consider a company which wishes to give
      bonuses to its employees (chosen from a finite set of possible amounts). Each employee
      has a grade, with higher grades corresponding to more important posts. Some, but not all,
      employees have an immediate boss to whom they report. In this case, the employee and
      the immediate boss must receive bonuses such that the sum of the bonuses of the employee
      and the boss is bounded above and below by a specified amount. On the other hand, if
      an employee has no immediate boss, then the rule is that they must not receive a bigger
      bonus than anyone at a higher grade. We will see, in Example 1, that this bonus-assignment
      problem falls in a hybrid tractable class.
          As another example, consider the same company which now wants to assign staff to a
      project, minimising total salary costs while respecting constraints concerning the minimum
      number of personnel from each section, the maximum total number of staff on the project,
      as well as the availability of each member of staff. Again, we will see, in Example 4, that
      this problem falls into a hybrid tractable class
          An important way to classify work on hybrid tractability is how classes of instances are
      defined. We consider the following ways of defining a class of instances of (V)CSPs:
          independent restrictions on both the language of constraints (or cost functions) and on
          the structure of the instance.
          excluding generic sub-instances (known as forbidden patterns).
          properties that are required to hold after a preprocessing operation, such as establishing
          a certain level of consistency, has been performed.
          graph properties of the (weighted) microstructure of the instance.
          instances which are so strongly constrained that this implies a polynomial bound on
          search-tree size (or, on the contrary, so weakly constrained that there is always a solution).

          Historically, different hybrid classes have been identified by attempting to generalise
      language or structural restrictions, or to determine a large class of instances solved by a
      particular algorithmic technique, or to translate known results from another field, usually
      graph theory, to (V)CSPs. The field of hybrid tractability has not yet reached maturity and
      is notably lacking a general theory which would allow us to express all the above types of
      restrictions, together with language and structural restrictions, in a common language. Such
      a unified language would no doubt lead to a greater understanding and new applications.

       2     Independent Language and Structure Restrictions
      A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) instance I is given by a triple hX, D, Ci, where
      X = {X1 , . . . , Xn } is a finite set of variables, D is a finite set of values, and C is a finite
      set of constraints. Each constraint c ∈ C is a pair hv, Ri, where v, the constraint scope, is
      a list of k variables from X and R ⊆ Dk , the constraint relation, is a k-ary relation on D.
      We call k the arity of the constraint. We note that different constraints within the same
      instance can have different arity. The question is whether there is an assignment of values to
      the variables that satisfies all the constraints. More formally, to decide whether there is an
      assignment s : X → D such that for every c ∈ C with c = (v, R) and v = (Xi1 , . . . , Xik ), we
      have hs(Xi1 ), . . . , s(Xik )i ∈ R.
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                          115


    In language-based classes of CSPs, one restricts the set of constraint relations R on D
that can appear in any instance. A finite set of relations on a fixed finite set D is called
a constraint language and we denote by CSP(Γ) the class of CSP instances in which all
constraint relations belong to Γ.
    In structure-based classes of CSPs, one restricts the type of interactions of the constraint
scopes s (by restricting the hypergraph of the constraint scopes s on X) that can appear in
any instance.
    We remark that an equivalent definition of CSPs is the following: given two relational
structures A and B, is there a homomorphism from A to B? Language-based CSPs correspond
to fixing B to a single relational structure (corresponding to a constraint language) whereas
structure-based CSPs correspond to requiring A ∈ A for some (infinite) class A of relational
structures [34].
    In this section we will discuss known results on the complexity of CSPs that impose
independent restrictions on the structure of the instance and on the constraint language.

2.1     Planarity
A constraint language is called Boolean if the domain D is equal to {0, 1}.
    The incidence graph of a CSP instance I = hX, D, Ci has X ∪ C as its vertex set and
(Xi , c) is an edge, for Xi ∈ X and c ∈ C, if Xi ∈ v where c = (v, R).
    For a Boolean constraint language Γ, we denote by CSPp (Γ) the set of CSP instances
from CSP(Γ) with planar incidence graphs and with the condition that, for each constraint
in the instance, the variables in the scope of the constraint appear in the clockwise order (in
some fixed planar embedding).
    The complexity of Boolean planar language-restricted CSPs has recently been established.
First, it was shown that, apart from Boolean constraint languages Γ where CSP(Γ) is
tractable (and thus also CSPp (Γ) is tractable), CSPp (Γ) is intractable unless Γ is an even
∆-matroid [26]. Secondly, the tractability of CSPp (Γ) for even ∆-matroids was shown [38].
In order to define even ∆-matroids we need some further notation.
    We use ⊕ for the exclusive or. For a tuple t over {0, 1}, we denote by t the tuple
obtained from t by flipping all values; i.e., t = t ⊕ (1, . . . , 1). We say that a relation R
is self-complementary if for every t ∈ R we have t ∈ R. For a self-complementary R, we
denote by dR the relation {(t1 ⊕ t2 , t2 ⊕ t3 , . . . , tk ⊕ t1 ) | (t1 , . . . , tk ) ∈ R}. We say that Γ is
self-complementary if every R ∈ Γ is self-complementary. We define dΓ = {dR | R ∈ Γ}. A
set M ⊆ {0, 1}k is a ∆-matroid if for all ht1 , . . . , tk i, ht01 , . . . , t0k i ∈ M and every 1 ≤ i ≤ k
with ti 6= t0i there is 1 ≤ j ≤ k with tj 6= t0j such that t with ti and tj flipped also belongs to
M . (We also allow the case of i = j, in which case the new tuple that is required to belong
to M is obtained from t by flipping the ith position.) A ∆-matroid M is called even if all
tuples in M have the same parity of the number of 1s. (Note that in this case i and j cannot
be the same in the definition of ∆-matroids as this would change the parity of 1s.) Finally, a
Boolean constraint language is called an even ∆-matroid if Γ is self-complementary and each
relation in dΓ is an even ∆-matroid.
    We now give an example of a constraint language that can be used to model the perfect
matching problem in graphs as a planar CSP [26]. Let Mk ⊆ {0, 1}k be the relation containing
the k-tuples in which precisely one coordinate is set to one (and all others are set to zero).
It is easy to check that Mk is an even ∆-matroid for every k. Let Γpm be the constraint
language on {0, 1} with dΓ = ∪k≥1 Mk . It can be checked that Γ is self-complementary
and by definition dΓ is an even ∆-matroid. Hence Γpm is an even ∆-matroid. For a graph
G = (V, E), we construct an instance IG = hE, {0, 1}, Ci of Boolean CSP(Γpm ) with a



                                                                                                                Chapter 04
116   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


      constraint hhe1 , . . . , ek i, Mk i ∈ C for every degree-k vertex of G incident to edges e1 , . . . , ek .
      It is clear that perfect matchings in G are in 1-to-1 correspondence with satisfying assignments
      to IG .


      2.2     Bounded Occurrence
      Another natural restriction is that of bounded occurrence of variables in the constraints.
      We denote by CSPk (Γ) the class of instances of CSP(Γ) in which every variable appears
      in at most k constraints. Feder showed that for Boolean constraint languages that contain
      constants, CSP3 (Γ) is as hard as CSP(Γ) [27]. Here a constant is a unary singleton relation.
      On the Boolean domain D = {0, 1}, there are only two constants c0 = {(0)} and c1 = {(1)}.
          Boolean CSPs in which every variable appears exactly in two constraints are called edge
      CSPs in [38] but have been long known as Holant problems in the counting community. We
      denote by CSPe (Γ) the set of CSP instances from CSP(Γ) in which every variable appears in
      exactly two constraints. (The case of a variable appearing in at most two constraints, CSP2 (Γ),
      can be reduced to this case [27]). Feder showed that if Γ is a Boolean constraint language
      including constants such that CSP(Γ) is intractable then CSPe (Γ) is intractable unless Γ is a
      ∆-matroid. Tractability has been shown for several special classes of ∆-matroids [27, 21]
      and most recently for even ∆-matroids [38] (where the reader can find more references). For
      instance, CSPe (Γpm ) captures precisely the perfect matching problem in graphs.


      2.3     Lifted Languages
      Two recent papers [39, 52] study certain hybrid classes of CSPs in which the algebraic
      machinery developed for the computational complexity of constraint languages is (partially)
      applicable. In particular, it has been shown that the complexity of the class of CSP(Γ)
      instances in which the structure (hypergraph of constraint scopes) is closed under inverse
      homomorphisms can be shifted to the analysis of the complexity of a CSP(Γ0 ) instance,
      where Γ0 is a new, “lifted” language [39, 52]. A class of structures H is closed under inverse
      homomorphisms if whenever there is a homomorphism from R0 to R ∈ H then R0 ∈ H.
      Examples of such structures include classes of acyclic or k-colourable graphs. Non-examples
      include classes of planar or perfect graphs.


       3     Forbidden Patterns

      The notion of forbidden pattern is based on the idea that local properties of an instance
      may guarantee tractability and that a natural local property is the exclusion of those sub-
      instances which are obstructions to polynomial-time solution algorithms. Classifying graphs
      by excluding substructures is classical in graph theory and a CSP instance can be represented
      by a labelled graph, known as its microstructure, so this approach has the advantage that it
      sometimes allows us to use known results from graph theory.
          For the moment, the study of forbidden patterns has been mostly limited to binary CSPs
      with no structure on the variables or domain values except possibly a total order. In this
      section, we begin with some formal definitions before presenting certain tractable classes
      defined by forbidden patterns. We then go on to consider extensions to non-binary CSPs
      and explore classes defined by excluding patterns as topological minors.
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                    117


3.1     Definitions
A binary CSP instance requires the assignment of values from some specified finite domain D
to a finite set X of variables {X1 , . . . , Xn }. Each variable Xi has its own domain of possible
values D(Xi ) ⊆ D. Without loss of generality, in this section we assume that each pair of
variables, Xi , Xj ∈ X is constrained by a constraint relation Rij . A constraint is non-trivial
if it is not the Cartesian product of the domains of the two variables. A solution to a binary
CSP instance is an assignment s of values to variables, such that, for each constraint Rij ,
hs(Xi ), s(Xj )i ∈ Rij .
     The constraint graph of an instance I is GI = hVI , EI i, where VI = X is the set of
variables of I and EI is the set of pairs {Xi , Xj } for which Rij is non-trivial. The instance I
is arc consistent if ∀i 6= j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, ∀a ∈ D(Xi ), ∃b ∈ D(Xj ) such that ha, bi ∈ Rij . The
instance I is directional arc consistent if ∀i < j ∈ {1, . . . , n}, ∀a ∈ D(Xi ), ∃b ∈ D(Xj ) such
that ha, bi ∈ Rij .
     One possible presentation of a binary CSP instance is as a labelled graph whose vertices
are the set of possible variable-value assignments. This (labelled) graph is known as the
(coloured) microstructure [37, 10, 50, 6, 43]. An n-variable binary CSP instance I in this
microstructure presentation is an n-partite graph hA1 , . . . , An , E + i, where the ith part Ai
corresponds to the set of possible assignments hXi , ai to variable Xi and there is an edge in
E + between hXi , ai ∈ Ai and hXj , bi ∈ Aj if and only if (a, b) ∈ Rij . We refer to individual
variable-value assignments, such as hXi , ai (i.e., the vertices of this n-partite graph) as points.
If v is some variable of the instance we use the notation Av to represent the set of possible
assignments to v. (Sets Av are sometimes called potatoes.) Thus Ai and AXi are synonyms.
     An instance I can also be presented as a negative microstructure which is the n-partite
labelled graph hA1 , . . . , An , E − i, where there is an edge in E − between points p ∈ Ai and
q ∈ Aj (for i 6= j) if and only if there is no edge between p and q in E + .
     We refer to edges in E + as positive edges and edges in E − as negative edges. We now
generalise the notion of microstructure and negative microstructure to obtain patterns: a
pattern is a labelled n-partite graph which has a set of positive edges, E + , and a set of
negative edges, E − .
     A binary CSP instance can be seen as a special kind of pattern where the parts correspond
to the variables of the instance and there is exactly one positive or negative edge between
each pair of possible assignments to each pair of distinct variables. Positive edges connect
assignments that are allowed by the constraint on the corresponding pair of variables, and
negative edges connect assignments that are disallowed by this constraint.
     A pattern P = hA1 , . . . , An , E + , E − i is a partially specified instance: there may be pairs
of points p ∈ Ai , q ∈ Aj (with i 6= j) such that there is neither a positive edge nor a negative
edge between p and q. A point is said to be isolated if it does not belong to any edges in
E + or E − . We do not specifically disallow the possibility that two points in a pattern are
joined by both positive and negative edges: such patterns cannot occur as a subpattern in
an instance but can occur as a topological minor (c.f. Section 3.6).
     In order that pattern exclusion be natural we define a pattern P as occurring in an-
other pattern Q if, after arbitrary renaming and then possible merging of points, we get a
substructure of Q.
     A pattern P 0 = hA01 , . . . , A0n , E 0+ , E 0− i is a homomorphic image of a pattern P =
                                                                         Sn           Sn
hA1 , . . . , An , E + , E − i if there exists a surjective mapping f : i=1 Ai → i=1 A0i such that
               Sn
     ∀p, q ∈ k=1 Ak , p and q belong to the same part Ai if and only if f (p) and f (q) belong
     to the same part A0j ,



                                                                                                          Chapter 04
118   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems

                                                                    
           a•      • c                g•        •                   0 •P     • c0 
                                             h                 a     PP
                                                                           
           b •     •d                 e •      •                  b0 •     P•     • e0
                                                                           P
                                                                     d0 
                                                                                        w
                Z1                           Z2                            XI

                                     
                               α •PP • γ
                                    
                                     PP     α>β
                               β •    P• δ
                                            γ>δ
                                     
                                    MC
         Figure 1 Four patterns.


          ∀i, j ∈ {1, . . . , n} with i 6= j, ∀p ∈ Ai , ∀q ∈ Aj : {p, q} ∈ E + ⇒ {f (p), f (q)} ∈ E 0+ and
          {p, q} ∈ E − ⇒ {f (p), f (q)} ∈ E 0− .
      Note that forming a homomorphic image of a pattern allows the parts to be renamed, and
      points p, q within the same part to be merged (provided there is no third point r such that
      {p, r} and {q, r} are different types of edges).
          We will say that a pattern P occurs as a sub-pattern of a pattern Q if Q can be transformed
      into a homomorphic image of P by a sequence of the following substructure operations:
          removal of (positive or negative) edges,
          removal of isolated points, and
          removal of empty parts.

          A binary CSP instance is a pattern in which a part Ai corresponds to the set of assignments
      to a variable; hence elimination of a part corresponds to the elimination of a variable.
          Consider the three patterns Z1, Z2 and XI shown in Figure 1. Points are represented by
      bullets, and points representing assignments to the same variable v are grouped together
      within an oval representing Av . Solid lines represent positive edges (i.e., compatibility of
      the corresponding pair of points) and dashed lines negative (i.e., incompatibility) edges.
      For example, the pattern Z1 consists of 4 points a, b ∈ Av0 , c, d ∈ Av1 , two positive edges
      E + = {ac, bd} and one negative edge E − = {bd}. Z1 occurs in Z2 since Z2 can be transformed
      into a homomorphic image of Z1 by removal of edge gh and point g (under a homomorphism
      that maps a and b to the same point e in Z2). The pattern Z2 occurs in XI (as a subpattern)
      since XI can be transformed into a homomorphic image of Z2 by removal of the edges a0 d0
      and d0 e0 followed by the removal of the (then) isolated point e0 together with the (then)
      empty part w. By transitivity of the occurrence relation, Z1 also occurs in XI.
          We also consider patterns with structure in the sense of relations between the points in a
      pattern. In this case the homomorphism f in the definition of homomorphic image, above,
      must preserve the structure of the pattern. This structure may be, for example, an order on
      the parts (i.e., variables) or an order on points within a part (i.e., domain values). Patterns
      (such as Z1, Z2 and XI in Figure 1) without any such structure are known as flat patterns [6].
      The pattern MC in Figure 1 has the structure consisting of the partial order: α > β, γ > δ.
      Since XI is a flat pattern, MC does not occur in XI since this partial order clearly cannot be
      preserved by a homomorphism from MC to XI. On the other hand, Z1 occurs in MC (via a
      homomorphism which maps both a and b to α, c to δ and d to γ) since Z1 has no structure
      to be preserved.
          A class of binary CSP instances can be defined by forbidding a pattern P . We use the
      notation CSPSP (P ) to represent the set of binary CSP instances in which the pattern P does
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                119



                                                                             
           •               •         •                   •        •               •
                    ...                                                   ...
           •               •         •         •         •        •               •
                                                                             
                                               •
                                            v
           •               •         •
                    ...
           •               •         •
                                   

    Figure 2 The negative pattern Pivot(k), where the number of edges in each of the three branches
leaving the central variable v is k.


not occur as a subpattern. We say that a pattern P is tractable if there is a polynomial-time
algorithm to solve CSPSP (P ) and intractable if CSPSP (P ) is NP-hard. The pattern MC is
tractable since CSPSP (MC) is the class of binary max-closed instances [36]. On the other
hand, we know that Z2 is intractable since it does not satisfy a necessary condition for
tractability described in Section 3.2. If P occurs as a subpattern of Q, then CSPSP (P ) ⊆
CSPSP (Q) and hence P is tractable if Q is tractable [6]. Thus we can immediately deduce
that Z1 is tractable (since it occurs in MC) and that XI is intractable (since Z2 occurs in XI).
    An important point is that applying any reduction operation which eliminates domain
elements, such as arc consistency, SAC (Singleton Arc Consistency) or neighbourhood
substitution [24], cannot introduce a pattern in an instance. On the other hand, reduction
operations, such as 3-consistency, which modify constraints may introduce patterns.
    A pattern P (such as pattern Z1 in Figure 1) is mergeable if there exists some pattern Q
(such as the pattern Z1 without the edge ac or the point a) such that Q is a homomorphic
image of P but P is not a homomorphic image of Q; otherwise, P is unmergeable. A point p
(such as e0 in pattern XI in Figure 1) is called dangling if p belongs to at most one positive
edge {p, q} and no negative edges (and p belongs to no other relation, such as a partial order,
in the case of patterns with structure). The corresponding dangling reduction consists in
removing both the edge {p, q} and the point p (together with the part to which p belonged
if this part becomes empty after removal of p). Dangling points provide no information in
arc-consistent instances, in the sense that P occurs in an instance I if and only if the pattern
P 0 occurs in I where P 0 is the result of applying a dangling reduction to P . Thus, using the
fact that establishing arc consistency cannot introduce patterns, we have that P is tractable
if and only if P 0 is tractable.
    An unmergeable pattern with no dangling points is called irreducible. In Figure 1, pattern
Z1 is mergeable, whereas patterns Z2 and XI are unmergeable. The point e0 in pattern XI is
dangling (as is the point a in the pattern Z1) but not β and δ in pattern MC (because of the
partial order relation on these points). Thus of the four patterns in Figure 1, only Z2 and
MC are irreducible.

3.2    Characterising Tractable Patterns
The theoretical tools necessary to provide a complete characterisation of tractable patterns
have yet to be discovered. Indeed, characterising tractable patterns would appear to be, in
general, even more difficult than characterising tractable constraint languages or tractable
constraint-hypergraph structures. Nevertheless, certain characterisation results have been
proved. One important result concerns the negative edges in a tractable unmergeable pattern.
It has been shown that the “skeleton” of a tractable unmergeable pattern, consisting of just



                                                                                                      Chapter 04
120   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


                                                                    
                     •Q                          •                      •
                      
                       Q                                           
                         Q•
                                           • 
                                                                       
                                                                            •
                                                                           
                     •                          •                     •
                                                                    NEGTRANS
         Figure 3 Tractable triangle patterns.

                                  
              •Q  •    •    •     •  
               Q • •PP •  •PP •   Q
                                      Q • Q
                                            Q •
                  Q•   P•  P•      Q•    Q•
                
                          
                                       •
                                            
                                    •  •
                      
              •     •     •
               T
                  1  T
                        2   T
                              3    T4   T
                                            5

         Figure 4 The five tractable irreducible flat patterns on 3 variables and 2 constraints.


      the negative edges, must occur as a subpattern of (possibly multiple copies of) the pattern
      Pivot(k), shown in Figure 2, for some constant k [6]. Unfortunately, very little is known
      about the positive edges that can be added to such skeletons of negative edges.
          Given that a general characterisation seems, for the moment, out of reach, certain special
      cases have been studied, such as triangle patterns and 2-constraint patterns [19, 15]. Figure 3
      shows the three tractable flat patterns on a triangle of 3 points and 3 edges [19]. Although
      the first two patterns define fairly trivial classes, the third one, called NEGTRANS, is
      interesting since CSPSP (NEGTRANS) includes non-trivial instances composed of arbitrary
      unary constraints and non-overlapping All-Different constraints [48, 55]. The class of binary
      CSP instances satisfying this negative-transitivity property has been generalised to a large
      tractable class of optimisation problems involving cost functions of arbitrary arity which we
      will discuss in Section 7 [19]. Figure 4 shows the five tractable irreducible flat patterns on 3
      variables and 2 constraints [15]. CSPSP (T4 ) is interesting since it includes all binary CSP
      instances with zero-one-all constraint relations [13] (which can be seen as a generalisation of
      2SAT to non-Boolean domains).
          Given the relatively modest successes in defining new and useful tractable classes by
      forbidding flat patterns, it is natural to consider possible extensions of patterns by studying
      structured patterns, non-binary patterns and other forms of occurrence than subpattern
      occurrence. These three extensions are the subject of the remainder of this section.


      3.3    Partially-Ordered Patterns
      The pattern BTP shown in Figure 5 is known as a broken triangle (since the positive edges
      can be said to form a triangle which is broken at variable z). Forbidding this pattern on all
      triples of variables x < y < z defines a tractable class CSPSP (BTP) [16]. This class includes
      all binary CSP instances whose constraint graph is a tree T since, ordering the variables
      according to a pre-order of T , each variable z is constrained by at most one variable y < z,
      its parent in T , and hence the broken-triangle pattern cannot occur. If a variable ordering
      exists such that the broken-triangle pattern does not occur, then this order can be found
      in polynomial time: it suffices to establish arc consistency and then successively eliminate
      variables v which are not the right-hand variable z of a broken triangle (since we know that
      such a variable v can be the last variable in the ordering among the remaining variables).
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                               121


                                         
                              •XX         •
                              \ XXXX 
                              x \       X•
                                        X                     x<y<z
                                        
                                   \ 
                                 \
                                          z
                                     •
                                    \
                                    
                                     y

   Figure 5 A binary CSP instance satisfies the broken triangle property if this pattern (known as
a broken triangle or BTP) does not occur in the instance.


CSPSP (BTP) is solved by arc consistency since the BTP is exactly the obstruction which
prevents an arc-consistent instance being backtrack-free. Indeed, even if the variable order is
unknown, MAC (Maintaining Arc Consistency) solves CSPSP (BTP) [16]. Thus, most CSP
solvers will automatically solve in polynomial time all instances in CSPSP (BTP).

I Example 1. Consider a company which wishes to give bonuses to its n employees. Each
employee i ∈ {1, . . . , n} has a grade gradei , with higher grades corresponding to more
important posts. Some, but not all, employees have an immediate boss to whom they report.
The company wants to assign bonuses so that each employee’s bonus is a multiple of 50 euros
between 5% and 20% of their salary. If an employee i has an immediate boss bi , then the
sum of the bonuses of i and bi must be no less than 10% and no more than 30% of the salary
of bi . On the other hand, if an employee i has no immediate boss then the rule is that they
must not receive a bigger bonus than anyone at a higher grade.
    Let the variable xi be the bonus assigned to employee i. We assume that employees are
numbered so that (gradei > gradej ) ⇒ (i < j). Thus, for example, employee number 1 is
the CEO of the company. The domain of xi is the multiples of 50 between 5% and 20% of
the salary sali of employee i. If employee i has a boss bi , then there is a binary constraint
0.1salbi ≤ xi + xbi ≤ 0.3salbi . Indeed, this is the only constraint between xi and the variables
xj (j < i). If employee i has no boss, then there are binary constraints xi ≤ xj for each
j ∈ {1, . . . , i − 1} such that gradej > gradei . In either case, it is easy to verify that xi
cannot be the rightmost variable in the broken triangle pattern shown in Figure 5. Thus, this
problem falls in CSPSP (BTP) and is solved by arc consistency. The constraint graph is of
unbounded tree-width: for example, if no-one has a boss but everyone is at a different grade,
then the constraint graph is the complete graph. Furthermore, the language of constraints is
NP-hard. Thus, this bonus-assignment problem defines a truly hybrid tractable class.

   We have seen that broken-triangle free instances are solved by arc consistency. Arc
consistency is also a decision procedure for CSPSP (EMC) where EMC (Extended Max-
Closed) is the pattern shown in the top left of Figure 6. EMC is particularly interesting
because CSPSP (EMC) is a strict generalisation of binary max-closed CSPs [36] (since the
pattern MC shown in Figure 1 is a subpattern of EMC).

I Example 2. Consider a binary CSP instance I with integer domains and in which all
binary constraints are of the following form:

   aXi + bXj ≥ c

where a, b, c are non-zero constants. We say that Xi occurs positively (respectively, negatively)
if a > 0 (a < 0). These constraints are max-closed if and only if at least one of the variables



                                                                                                     Chapter 04
122   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems



                                                                           
            α •XX          • γ                                α •XX          •
               \ X XX                                        \ XX   
                                                                         X
                      X                                                 X
            β •\        X• δ                                 β •\        X•
                        X                                                 X
              \                                               \         
              x   \       z                                    x   \       z
                     •
                    \          x<z                                     •
                                                                       \
                               α>β                                               x < y, z
                                                                      
            EMC                 γ>δ                            BTX      y         α>β



                                                                            
            α •XX         •                                     •XX         •
               \ XXX                                          \ X X
                                                                       X   
                                                                          X
                       X                                              
            β •\       X•
                         X                                        •\
                                                                            X•
                                                                             X
               \                                               \         
                   \      z                                         \ 
                     •
                    \                                                   •
                                                                        \
                             y<z                                       
             BTI     y        α>β                                LX

          Figure 6 Partially-ordered patterns that are solved by arc consistency.


      Xi , Xj occurs positively [36]. Suppose that in I, for all constraints on a pair of variables
      Xi < Xj in which both variables occur negatively, the variable Xj only occurs negatively in
      other constraints. Then I ∈ CSPSP (EMC), and hence is solved by arc consistency.

          In fact, if we consider only unmergeable patterns to which we then add a partial order to
      the variables and/or the domains, then there are just five patterns P such that arc consistency
      is a decision procedure for CSPSP (P ): BTP and the patterns EMC, BTX, BTI and LX
      shown in Figure 6 [20]. Given a fixed total order of the domain, there is a polynomial-time
      algorithm to find a total variable ordering such that any one of these patterns does not
      occur in an instance (or to determine that no such ordering exists). However, if the domain
      and variable orders are both unknown, then EMC, BTX and BTI become NP-complete to
      detect [20].

      3.4     Non-Binary CSPs
      Most work on forbidden-pattern tractability has been restricted to binary CSPs. Indeed,
      notions such as microstructure and forbidden pattern do not (yet) have a widely-accepted
      generalisation to non-binary constraints. Nonetheless, the notion of arbitrary-arity patterns
      can be said to be already present in language classes defined by a polymorphism [11]. A
      polymorphism can be viewed as a forbidden pattern in each constraint relation R of the
      instance. The forbidden pattern corresponding to a polymorphism f : Dr → D consists
      of a set of r positive tuples and one negative tuple. The positive tuples t1 , . . . , tr ∈ R
      are consistent assignments to the same variables and the negative tuple f (t1 , . . . , tr ) ∈            /R
      is the assignment to the same variables resulting from the pointwise application of f to
      the t1 , . . . , tr . By forbidding the pattern (t1 , . . . , tr ∈ R, f (t1 , . . . , tr ) ∈
                                                                                                 / R), we impose the
      well-known polymorphism condition t1 , . . . , tr ∈ R =⇒ f (t1 , . . . , tr ) ∈ R [11].
          As we have seen in Section 3.3, in the binary CSP, the broken-triangle property defines
      a tractable class CSPSP (BTP). Although the definition of tractable classes by forbidden
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                123


                                                  
                                                    • a
                                   u<z •hhhhh 
                                       A         h• b
                                                 
                                       X A 
                                         A
                                                    z
                                           A• t<z
                                           
                                           Y
   Figure 7 Illustration of a directional general-arity broken triangle.


patterns in general-arity CSPs is an area which remains largely unexplored, a generalisation
of the broken-triangle class CSPSP (BTP) to general-arity CSPs has recently been given [14].
    Purely for notational convenience we assume that a CSP instance I is given in the form
of a set of negative (incompatible) tuples NoGoods(I), where a tuple is a set of variable-value
assignments, and that the predicate Good(I, t) is true iff the tuple t does not contain any
pair of distinct assignments to the same variable and @t0 ⊆ t such that t0 ∈ NoGoods(I). We
write Good as a predicate whereas Nogoods(I) is a set to emphasize the asymmetry between
the notions of positive and negative tuples. This asymmetry is not evident in the case of
binary CSPs nor in the case of polymorphisms.
    We suppose that a total ordering < of the variables of a CSP instance I is given. We write
t<x to represent the subset of the tuple t consisting of assignments to variables occurring
before x in the order <, and V ars(t) to denote the set of all variables assigned by t.

I Definition 3. A directional general-arity broken triangle (DGABTP) on assignments a, b
to variable z in a CSP instance I is a pair of tuples t, u (containing no assignments to variable
z) satisfying the following conditions:
1. t<z and u<z are non-empty,
2. Good(I, t<z ∪ u<z ) ∧ Good(I, t<z ∪ {hz, ai}) ∧ Good(I, u<z ∪ {hz, bi}),
3. t ∪ {hz, bi} ∈ NoGoods(I) ∧ u ∪ {hz, ai} ∈ NoGoods(I),
4. ∃t0 s.t. V ars(t0 ) = V ars(t) ∧ (t0 )<z = t<z ∧ t0 ∪ {hz, ai} ∈   / NoGoods(I),
       0             0                     0 <z     <z        0
5. ∃u s.t. V ars(u ) = V ars(u) ∧ (u ) = u               ∧ u ∪ {hz, bi} ∈ / NoGoods(I).
I satisfies the directional general-arity broken-triangle property (DGABTP) according to the
variable ordering < if no directional general-arity broken triangle occurs on any pair of values
a, b for any variable z.

     Points (1), (2) and (3) of Definition 3 are illustrated by Figure 7. This figure is similar to
Figure 5 except that X,Y are sets of variables and t<z ,u<z are tuples. Note that the sets
X = V ars(u<z ) and Y = V ars(t<z ) may overlap. Solid lines now represent partial solutions
(i.e., consistent assignments to subsets of variables). The two dashed lines represent nogoods
(i.e., tuples not in the constraint relation on its variables) u ∪ {hz, ai} and t ∪ {hz, bi} which
possibly involve assignments to variables w > z. In the case of binary CSPs, a directional
general-arity broken triangle is equivalent to a broken triangle as shown in Figure 5 (since
nogoods, being binary, involve no other variables w > z and the sets X, Y are necessarily
singletons). Points (4) and (5) of Definition 3 are technical conditions (which always hold
if a weak form of directional consistency holds) ensuring that the DGABTP can be tested
in polynomial time for a given order whether constraints are given as tables of satisfying
assignments or as nogoods.
     Any instance I satisfying the DGABTP can be solved in polynomial time by repeatedly
applying the following two operations: (i) merge two values in the last remaining variable



                                                                                                      Chapter 04
124   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


      (according to the order <); (ii) eliminate this variable when its domain becomes a singleton.
      Merging values a, b ∈ D(z) in a general-arity CSP instance I consists of replacing a, b in D(z)
      by a new value c which is compatible with all variable-value assignments compatible with at
      least one of the assignments hz, ai or hz, bi, thus producing an instance I 0 with the new set
      of nogoods defined as follows:

         NoGoods(I 0 )   =    {t ∈ NoGoods(I) | hz, ai, hz, bi ∈
                                                               / t}
                         ∪    {t ∪ {hz, ci} | t ∪ {hz, ai} ∈ NoGoods(I) ∧
                                  ∃t0 ∈ NoGoods(I) s.t. t0 ⊆ t ∪ {hz, bi}}
                         ∪    {t ∪ {hz, ci} | t ∪ {hz, bi} ∈ NoGoods(I) ∧
                                  ∃t0 ∈ NoGoods(I) s.t. t0 ⊆ t ∪ {hz, ai}} .

      In general, merging a pair of values in an instance I may produce an instance I 0 which is
      satisfiable even though I was not, but forbidding directional general-arity broken triangles
      prevents this from happening. Eliminating a variable z whose domain is a singleton {a}
      consists in making the assignment hz, ai and eliminating hz, ai from all nogoods.
          Unfortunately, when the variable order is not given, testing the existence of a variable
      ordering for which a CSP instance satisfies the DGABTP is NP-complete in the general-arity
      case [14]. This can be contrasted with the binary case in which this test is polytime.
          Note that the set of general-arity CSP instances whose dual instance satisfies the BTP,
      denoted by DBTP, also defines a tractable class which can be recognised in polynomial time
      even if the ordering of the variables in the dual instance is unknown [44]. This DBTP class
      is incomparable with DGABTP (which is equivalent to BTP in binary CSP) since DBTP is
      known to be incomparable with the BTP class already in the special case of binary CSP [44].
      A general-arity broken triangle can be said to be centred on a pair of values in the domain
      of a variable whereas a broken triangle in the dual instance is centred on a pair of tuples
      in a constraint relation. One consequence of this is that eliminating tuples from constraint
      relations cannot introduce broken triangles in the dual instance, whereas the DGABTP is
      only invariant under elimination of domain values. On the other hand, the DGABTP is
      invariant under adding a complete constraint (i.e., whose relation is the direct product of the
      domains of the variables in its scope) whereas this operation can introduce broken triangles
      in the dual instance. Another important difference is that DGABTP depends on an order on
      the variables whereas DBTP depends on an order on the constraints.
          The generalisation of forbidden patterns to non-binary constraints is a largely unexplored
      area of research, but the generalisation of BTP to DGABTP has highlighted the asymmetry
      between positive and negative tuples when constraints are non-binary.

      3.5    Quantified Patterns
      The notion of forbidding patterns has also been extended to rules based on applying a
      sequence of quantifiers to the variables and values in a pattern. This has led to the discovery
      of novel variable-elimination or value-elimination techniques [7, 12]. As an example, consider
      the broken triangle pattern shown in Figure 5. It is known that we can eliminate variables
      which are not the right-hand variable of a broken triangle: the resulting instance is satisfiable
      if and only if the original instance was satisfiable [16]. This variable-elimination rule can
      be strictly generalised to the following rule illustrated in Figure 8: a variable z can be
      eliminated from an instance I without changing the satisfiability of I if for all other variables
      y, ∀a ∈ D(y), ∃b ∈ D(z) with ab a positive edge in I such that no broken triangle exists
      including this edge ab [12]. The class of binary CSP instances, known as ∀∃BTP, which are
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                      125


                                           
                                •XX         •b
                                \ XXXX 
                                x \       X•
                                          X                       x, y < z
                                          
                                     \ 
                                   \
                                            z
                                      a•
                                      \
                                      
                                       y

    Figure 8 In the ∀∃BTP class, for all pairs of variables y < z, ∀a ∈ D(y), ∃b ∈ D(z) such that for
all variables x < z, the broken triangle pattern shown does not occur.


such that all variables can be eliminated according to this rule strictly generalises the tractable
class CSPSP (BTP), since the BTP imposes the same condition but for all b ∈ D(Xk ).
    Let I be a binary arc-consistent CSP instance in the ∀∃BTP class and let s be a solution
to the instance obtained by eliminating the last variable z from I. We will give a sketch
proof that s can be extended to a solution for I. (We refer the reader to [12] for full details.)
By assumption, ∀y ∈ X \ {z}, ∀a ∈ D(y), ∃bya ∈ D(z) with abya a positive edge such that
∀x ∈ X \ {y, z}, ∀c ∈ D(x) with ac a positive edge and bya c a negative edge, ∀d ∈ D(z) with
cd a positive edge, ad is also a positive edge. For v ∈ X \ {z}, let Im(v) := {d ∈ D(z) | s(v)d
a positive edge}, where s(v) is the value assigned to variable v by s. If x, y ∈ X \ {z}
are such that s(x)bys(y) is a negative edge, then the ∀∃BTP property implies that Im(x) (
Im(y) [12]. Now choose some y ∈ X \ {z} such that Im(y) is minimal for inclusion among
the sets Im(v) (v ∈ X \ {z}). Then the assignment hz, bys(y) i is compatible with all the
assignments s(x) (x ∈ X \ {y, z}), otherwise we would have Im(x) ( Im(y) (contradicting
the minimality of Im(y)). Therefore, s can be extended to a solution to I, by making the
assignment s(z) = bs(y) .

3.6     Topological Minor Patterns
We now present a new operation on patterns which allows us to define the notion of a
topological minor of a pattern (and hence of a binary CSP instance). This new operation
is analogous to the operation of eliminating subdivisions (vertices of degree 2) that is used
to define a topological minor of a graph [25]. However, since patterns contain two kinds of
edges, the definition is slightly more complicated.
    This new operation, path reduction, will sometimes lead to the introduction of edges in
E + ∩ E − in a coloured microstructure hA1 , . . . , An , E + , E − i. This is why we do not impose
the restriction that E + and E − be disjoint in a pattern.
    In a pattern P = hA1 , . . . , An , E + , E − i, we say that two parts Ai , Aj are directly connected
if there is at least one (positive or negative) edge {p, q} ∈ E + ∪ E − with p ∈ Ai and q ∈ Aj .
    If Ai , Aj are not directly connected and Ak is directly connected only to Ai and Aj , then
the following operation can be performed, which is known as path reduction:
1. ∀p ∈ Ai , ∀q ∈ Aj : if ∃r ∈ Ak such that {p, r}, {r, q} ∈ E + , then introduce a new positive
    edge {p, q},
2. ∀p ∈ Ai , ∀q ∈ Aj : if ∃r, s ∈ Ak such that {p, r}, {s, q} ∈ E − , then introduce a new
    negative edge {p, q},
3. remove the part Ak and all edges containing points in Ak .

    This operation is illustrated in Figure 9. Positive and negative edges are treated differently
in this definition; this is because for p ∈ Ai and q ∈ Aj to be part of a solution to the



                                                                                                            Chapter 04
126   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems

                                                             
                        a••   •c                                    a•           •c
                          e      −→
                       b• •   •d                                   b• •d
                        f 
                                                                 
                        x w   y                                     x y
         Figure 9 Path reduction removes the part w.


                                                             
                                          •                   •
                                          •                   •
                                                             

                                                    
                                                    •

                                                    •
                                                    
         Figure 10 A pattern which defines the class of acyclic binary CSP instances when forbidden as a
      topological minor.




      sub-instance on variables Xi , Xj , Xk , the points p and q must both be compatible with some
      common point r ∈ Ak , whereas p and q may be incompatible if they are each incompatible
      with some point in Ak , not necessarily the same point. In Figure 9, after the path reduction
      operation which eliminates w, we have a positive edge ac (thanks to the edges ae and ec),
      but no positive edge bc. We also have a negative edge bd (thanks to the edges be and f d). As
      in the case of non-binary patterns (c.f. Section 3.4), it is essential to introduce an asymmetry
      between positive and negative edges in order to obtain a useful notion.
          A pattern P occurs as a topological minor of a pattern Q if Q can be transformed
      into a homomorphic image of P by a sequence of substructure operations (listed above in
      Section 3.1) and path reductions.
          We use the notation CSPTM (P ) to represent the set of binary CSP instances in which the
      pattern P does not occur as a topological minor. For each pattern P there are therefore two
      distinct notions of tractability: a pattern P is sub-pattern tractable if there is a polynomial-
      time algorithm to solve CSPSP (P ); a pattern P is topological-minor tractable if there is a
      polynomial-time algorithm to solve CSPTM (P ). A pattern which is sub-pattern tractable is
      topological-minor tractable since any pattern that occurs as a sub-pattern will also occur as
      a topological minor.
          One important tractable class of binary CSP instances is the class of instances whose
      constraint graph is acyclic [28]. However, this class cannot be defined by a finite set of
      forbidden sub-patterns [9]. On the other hand, it is straightforward to characterise the class
      of acyclic instances by forbidding a single pattern as a topological minor. Forbidding the
      pattern shown in Figure 10 as a topological minor exactly defines the class of binary CSP
      instances whose constraint graph is acyclic. Indeed, this idea can easily be extended to any
      of the tractable classes of binary CSP instances defined by imposing any fixed bound on
      the treewidth of the constraint graph [29] using the graph minor theorem [49]. However, it
      remains to be seen whether the notion of patterns occurring as topological minors can be
      used to define a practically useful and genuinely novel tractable class.
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                              127


 4         Classes Requiring a Level of Consistency
Some hybrid tractable classes have been defined which guarantee global consistency if some
local property holds after establishing a certain level of local consistency. One example is
that the constraints can be decomposed into the join of arity-r constraints after establishing
strong d(r − 1) + 1 consistency, where d is the maximum domain size [23]. Of course, in
general, establishing this level of consistency introduces constraints of order d(r − 1), so the
assumption that constraints are of arity r is very strong. This class has been generalised to
the class of arity-r CSP instances which are strongly ((m + 1)(r − 1) + 1)-consistent, where
given an r-ary constraint and an instantiation of r − 1 of the variables that participate in
the constraint, the parameter m (called the tightness) is an upper bound on the number of
instantiations of the rth variable that satisfy the constraint in the case that this is not the
whole domain [54].
    Naanaa [46] has proposed a generalisation of m-tightness. Let E be a finite set and let
{Ei }i∈I be a finite family of subsets of E. The family {Ei }i∈I is said to be independent if
and only if for all J ( I,
    \          \
       Ei (        Ej .
     i∈I          j∈J


In particular, observe that {Ei }i∈I cannot be independent if ∃j 6= j 0 ∈ I such that Ej ⊆ Ej 0 ,
since in this case and with J = I \ {j 0 } we would have
     \            \
           Ei =         Ej .
     i∈I          j∈J


Let I be a CSP instance whose variables are totally ordered by <. Let hσ, Ri be an r-ary
constraint whose scope σ contains a variable x and let t be a tuple that instantiates the r − 1
remaining variables of σ. Denote by Rx (t) the set of values in D(x) that can extend t to form
a tuple in the relation R. The directional extension of tuple t to variable x w.r.t. R and < is
defined to be Rx (t) if x is the last (w.r.t. the order <) variable in σ, and D(x) otherwise. A
family of extensions of tuples t ∈ T is said to be consistent if and only if the tuple formed by
the join ./t∈T t of the corresponding tuples is consistent. With respect to the ordering <,
the directional rank of x in I is the size of the largest independent and consistent family of
directional extensions to x, and the directional rank κ of I is the maximum directional rank
over all its variables. If I is a CSP instance with constraints of arity no greater than r which
has directional rank no greater than κ and is directional strong (κ(r − 1) + 1)-consistent,
then I is globally consistent [46]. In general, establishing this level of consistency introduces
constraints of arity κ(r − 1) which is no greater than r only if κ = 1 or (κ = 2 ∧ r = 2).
    There is an interesting link between directional rank and forbidden patterns. Directional
rank 1 is equivalent to the broken triangle property (i.e., forbidding as a subpattern the
pattern shown in Figure 5) and directional rank κ > 1 subsumes an extension of the broken
triangle property known as (κ + 1)-BTP [17]. A binary CSP instance satisfies k-BTP
if for all variables z and for all sets S of k variables occurring before z in the variable
ordering, ∃x, y ∈ S such that there are no broken triangles on variables x, y, z. We can see
that 2-BTP corresponds exactly to the broken triangle property. If a binary CSP instance
satisfies 3-BTP after establishment of directional strong 3-consistency, then it has directional
rank κ = 2 and is directional strong (κ(r − 1) + 1)-consistent (since r = 2), and hence is
globally consistent [46]. Directional rank 2 strictly subsumes 3-BTP since it is equivalent to
forbidding (as a subpattern) the pattern shown in Figure 11. This is a natural generalisation



                                                                                                    Chapter 04
128   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


                                                   
                                               •Q
                                               C@Q        
                                        
                                                 C @Q       •
                                                  C @QQ
                                        •`
                                         Q````C
                                                   C    @ Q•
                                          Q        `    @
                                                       ```
                                                           @•
                                              Q 
                                            Q        C     `
                                                Q C        
                                                    Q•C
                                                     
          Figure 11 A binary CSP instance has directional rank 2 if this pattern does not occur in the
      instance.


      of the broken-triangle pattern shown in Figure 5, but, unfortunately, we also require strong
      directional 3-consistency to obtain a tractable class and establishing this level of consistency
      may introduce the pattern.

       5     Microstructure-Based Classes
      We recall the definition of microstructure. We have seen that a binary CSP instance on
      variables X1 , . . . , Xn can be represented by the domain D(Xi ) of each variable Xi and a
      binary relation Rij for each pair of variables Xi , Xj (i 6= j) consisting of all possible consistent
      assignments to this pair of variables. If I is a binary CSP instance, then its microstructure
      is a graph hA, Ei where A = {(Xi , a) | a ∈ D(Xi )} is the set of possible variable-value
      assignments and E = {{(Xi , a), (Xj , b)} | (a, b) ∈ Rij } [37]. The microstructure relies on
      both the structure and the relations of the instance I and so is a natural place to look for
      hybrid tractable classes. In this section we study properties of the graph hA, Ei in which A is
      not partitioned into parts corresponding to variables (as was the case in patterns, studied in
      Section 3). Ignoring variable information has the obvious disadvantage that we lose possibly
      valuable information, but has the advantage that deep theorems from graph theory can be
      directly applied.
          The complement of a graph G = hV, Ei is the graph with vertices V and whose edges are
      the non-edges of G. The microstructure complement is the complement of the microstructure.
      Solutions to I are in one-to-one correspondence with the n-cliques of the microstructure of I
      and with the size-n independent sets of the microstructure complement of I.
          The chromatic number of a graph is the smallest number of colours required to colour
      its vertices so that no two adjacent vertices have the same colour. A graph G is perfect if
      for every induced subgraph H of G, the chromatic number of H is equal to the size of the
      largest clique contained in H. Since a maximum clique in a perfect graph can be found in
      polynomial time [33], the class of binary CSP instances with a perfect microstructure is
      tractable as a direct consequence, as observed in [50]. Perfect graphs can also be recognized
      in polynomial time [3].
          For a class of graphs C, a graph G is C-free if no induced subgraph of G is isomorphic to
      any graph in C. The cycle of order k is the graph with vertices v1 , . . . , vk and edges {vk , v1 }
      and {vi , vi+1 } for i = 1, . . . , k − 1. A hole is a cycle of length k ≥ 5. An antihole is the
      complement of a hole. An alternative definition of perfect graphs is that a graph is perfect
      if and only if it is (odd-hole,odd-antihole)-free [4]. Chordal graphs are examples of perfect
      graphs. Interesting examples of binary CSP instances whose microstructure is perfect are
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                               129


     instances with unary constraints together with a global AllDifferent constraint [50],
     instances which are arc consistent and max-closed after independent (and possibly
     unknown) permutations of each domain [31].


 6      Weakly or Strongly Constrained Instances

One way to define a tractable class is to only allow a small number of weak constraints,
in order to guarantee that the instance is always satisfiable. For example, if each variable
is in the scope of at most t constraints and in each constraint relation the proportion of
tuples that are disallowed is strictly less than 1/e(r(t − 1) + 1), where e is the base of natural
logarithms and r the arity of the constraint, then the instance is necessarily satisfiable [47].
    Another way to define a tractable class is to consider only instances which are sufficiently
strongly constrained so that there is necessarily only a small number of partial solutions
examined during search (and hence a small number of solutions). A simple example of a
condition that guarantees a polynomial number of solutions is functionality. A constraint
hσ, Ri is functional on variable Xi ∈ σ if the relation R contains no two assignments differing
only at variable Xi . A CSP instance is functional with root set of size k if there exists
a variable ordering X1 < . . . < Xn such that, for all i ∈ {k + 1, . . . , n}, there is some
constraint hσ, Ri with Xi ∈ σ ⊆ {X1 , . . . , Xi } that is functional on Xi . (Note that this
implies tractability.) In the case of binary CSP instances, a minimum root set can be found in
polynomial time [22]. Unfortunately, determining the size of a minimum root set is NP-hard
for ternary CSP instances [8].
    Another condition that guarantees a backtracking search tree of polynomial size (assuming
domain size bounded by a constant) is the k-Turan property [8] which we now define. Indeed,
this property is very strong since it guarantees a polynomial-size search tree for all variable
orderings. We say that a subset of variables S represents another set T if S ⊆ T . An
(n, k)-Turan system is a pair hX, Bi where B is a collection of subsets of the n-element set
X such that every k-element subset of X is represented by some set in B. For example, let
C4Turan be the class of binary CSP instances over a set of variables X, each with a Boolean
domain, in which each constraint is equivalent to a 3SAT clause and for each quadruple of
distinct variables Xi , Xj , Xk , X` there is at least one ternary constraint whose scope is a
subset of these variables. In this example, every 4-element subset of the set of n variables X
is represented by the scope of some ternary constraint, and hence hX, Si, where S is the set
of constraint scopes, is an (n, 4)-Turan system. An n-variable CSP instance over domain D
and variables X is k-Turan if hX, Bi forms an (n, k)-Turan system where B is the set of the
scopes of the constraints hσ, Ri for which

     ∀a, b ∈ D, {a, b}|σ| * R .

This condition says that at least one tuple is disallowed by the constraint over each Boolean
subdomain {a, b} of D. In the class C4Turan , all constraints satisfy this condition and hence
C4Turan is tractable since all instances in this class satisfy the 4-Turan property. Generalising
this example, the class of k-SAT instances where every k 0 -tuple of variables, where k 0 ≥ k, is
restricted by a clause is k 0 -Turan and hence tractable.
    It is an open question whether the k-Turan property can be relaxed in a way that
guarantees a polynomial-size search tree for just one variable ordering, rather than all
variable orderings, while imposing a weaker condition than functionality.



                                                                                                     Chapter 04
130   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


       7     Valued CSPs
      CSPs are inherently decision problems. In this section we discuss hybrid classes of valued CSPs,
      which is a generalisation of CSPs to problem that capture both decision and optimisation
      problems (and their combinations).
          We denote by Q = Q ∪ {∞} the set of extended rationals. A valued constraint satisfaction
      problem (VCSP) instance I is given by a triple hX, D, Ci, where X = {X1 , . . . , Xn } is a finite
      set of variables, D is a finite set of values, and C : Dn → Q is an objective function expressed
                                                                 Pq
      as a sum of valued constraints, i.e., C(X1 , . . . , Xn ) = i=1 γi (vi ), where γi : Dki → Q is
      a cost function of arity ki and vi ∈ X ki is the scope of the valued constraint γi (vi ). The
      question is to find an assignment of values to the variables that minimises the objective
      function C.
          The class of VCSP instances with {0, ∞}-valued cost functions corresponds to the class
      of CSP instances. VCSP instances with {0, 1}-valued cost functions are known as Min-CSPs.
      VCSP instances with Q-valued cost functions are known as finite-valued CSPs [53].
          Similarly to the case of CSPs, language-restricted VCSPs parameterised by the set of
      allowed cost functions in the instance have been studied [42]. In this section we will mention
      known results on the complexity of hybrid classes of VCSPs.
          The idea of lifted languages briefly discussed in Section 2.3 has also been applied to
      certain VCSPs [39, 52].

      7.1    JWP and Generalisations
      The study of hybrid classes of VCSPs was initiated in [18], where an interesting hybrid class
      called the joint winner property (JWP) was discovered. A class of binary VCSPs satisfies the
      JWP if for any three variable-value assignments (to three distinct variables), the multiset of
      pairwise costs imposed by the binary valued constraints does not have a unique minimum. If
      there is no valued constraint with the scope, say, v = hXi , Xj i, then we view it as a 0-valued
      constraint γ(v), where γ : D2 → Q is the constant-0 binary cost function. Note that the
      unary valued constraints in a VCSP that satisfies the JWP can be arbitrary. JWP generalises
      the tractable pattern NEGTRANS discussed in Section 3.2, as the NEGTRANS pattern
      precisely forbids the combination of one 0 cost and two ∞ costs.
          Following the discovery of JWP, Cooper and Živný classified classes of binary CSPs,
      Min-CSPs, finite-valued CSPs, and VCSPs parametrised by the allowed types of costs in
      triples of variable-value assignments (called triangles) [19]. In all studied cases, JWP was
      essentially the only interesting tractable case. Moreover, [19] generalised JWP to the tractable
      class of VCSPs with the cross-free convex (CFC) property.
          A function g : {0, . . . , s} → Q is called convex on the interval [l, u] if g is Q-valued on the
      interval [l, u] and the derivative of g is nondecreasing on [l, u], that is, g(m + 2) − g(m + 1) ≥
      g(m + 1) − g(m) for all m = l, . . . , u − 2.
          Sets A1 , . . . , Ar ⊆ A are called cross-free if for all 1 ≤ i, j ≤ r, either Ai ⊆ Aj , or Ai ⊇ Aj ,
      or Ai ∩ Aj = ∅, or Ai ∪ Aj = A [51].
          We interpret a solution s : X → D to a VCSP instance I = hX, D, Ci as its set of variable-
      value assignments {hXi , s(Xi )i | i = 1, . . . , n}. If Ai is a set of variable-value assignments of
      a VCSP instance I and s a solution to I, then we use the notation |s ∩ Ai | to represent the
      number of variable-value assignments in the solution s that lie in Ai .
          Finally we have everything we need to define the CFC property. Let I be a VCSP instance.
      Let A1 , . . . , Ar be cross-free sets of variable-value assignments of I. Let si be the number
      of distinct variables occurring in the set Ai . Instance I satisfies the cross-free convexity
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                   131


property if the objective function of I is g(s) = g1 (|s ∩ A1 |) + . . . + gr (|s ∩ Ar |), where each
gi : [0, si ] → Q (i = 1, . . . , r) is convex on an interval [li , ui ] ⊆ [0, si ] and gi (z) = ∞ for
z ∈ [0, li − 1] ∪ [ui + 1, si ].
    We remark that the functions gi above are not the cost functions associated with the
valued constraints. Note that similarly to JWP, the addition of any unary cost function
cannot destroy the cross-free convexity property because for each variable-value assignment
hXi , ai we can add the singleton Ai = {hXi , ai}, which is necessarily either disjoint from or
a subset of any other set Aj (and furthermore the corresponding function gi : {0, 1} → Q is
trivially convex).
    A special case of the CFC property are global cardinality constraints [48, 56] on cross-free
sets.

I Example 4. To give a concrete example, consider a company which needs to assign staff to
a project, minimising total salary cost while respecting constraints concerning the minimum
number of personnel from each section, the maximum total number of staff on the project,
as well as the availability of each member of staff. We can code this as a VCSP with a
boolean variable Xi for each member of staff with Xi assigned the value true if the person in
question is assigned to the project. The availability of each member of staff, as well as his/her
salary, can be coded as a unary cost function. Assuming each member of staff belongs to a
single section of the company, the remaining constraints are global cardinality constraints on
cross-free sets.
    The employees, numbered from 1 to n, are partitioned into sections Sj (j = 1, . . . , t).
                                                                 St
Let Aj = {hXi , truei | i ∈ Sj } (j = 1, . . . , t), A0 = j=1 Aj , and At+i = {hXi , truei}
(i = 1, . . . , n). The sets Ai (i = 0, . . . , t + n) are cross-free. Let g≤m : {0, . . . , n} → Q be
the function given by g≤m (x) = 0 if x ≤ m and g≤m (x) = ∞ if x > m, with g≥m defined
similarly. For i = 1, . . . , n, let hi : {0, 1} → Q be the function given by hi (0) = 0 and hi (1)
equal to the salary of employee i if he/she is available to work on the project, ∞ if not.
Suppose that the project requires at least ni employees from section i, for each i = 1, . . . , t,
making a total of at most N staff members. Then the objective function is
                            t
                            X                          n
                                                       X
        g≤N (|s ∩ A0 |) +         g≥ni (|s ∩ Aj |) +         hi (|s ∩ At+i |) .
                            j=1                        i=1


The functions g≤N and g≥ni are convex (indeed constant) on the interval on which they are
finite, and each hi is trivially convex on the interval [0, 1].

   It has recently been shown1 that the class of convex cross-free VCSPs is a special case of
M -convex functions studied in [45] and that JWP precisely captures binary M] -completable
    ]

functions.

7.2        Planarity
Similarly to the planar CSPs discussed in Section 2.1, one can define planar VCSPs. Fulla and
Živný gave necessary conditions on the tractability of planar VCSPs [30]. In particular, they
showed that if Γ is a Boolean valued constraint language such that VCSP(Γ) is intractable
then VCSPp (Γ) is intractable unless Γ is self-complementary in the valued sense; i.e., for every
γ ∈ Γ and every tuple t, γ(t) = γ(t). This is a generalisation of the self-complementarity


1
    Personal communication with Yuni Iwamasa and Kazuo Murota.




                                                                                                         Chapter 04
132   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


      condition for planar CSPs from [26] discussed in Section 2.1. Furthermore, [30] obtained a
      dichotomy for planar VCSPs for conservative language (i.e., languages containing all {0, 1}-
      valued unary cost functions) over arbitrary finite domains. As it turns out the planarity
      restriction does not give any new tractable languages in this setting, and the classification
      from [30] sharpens the classification of conservative valued constraint languages obtained
      in [41].


           References
       1   Libor Barto and Marcin Kozik. Constraint satisfaction problems solvable by local consist-
           ency methods. J. ACM, 61(1):3:1–3:19, 2014. doi:10.1145/2556646.
       2   Andrei Bulatov, Andrei Krokhin, and Peter Jeavons. Classifying the Complexity of
           Constraints using Finite Algebras. SIAM Journal on Computing, 34(3):720–742, 2005.
           doi:10.1137/S0097539700376676.
       3   Maria Chudnovsky, Gérard Cornuéjols, Xinming Liu, Paul Seymour, and Kristina Vuskovic.
           Recognizing Berge graphs. Combinatorica, 25(2):143–186, 2005.
       4   Maria Chudnovsky, Neil Robertson, Paul Seymour, and Robin Thomas. The strong perfect
           graph theorem. Annals of Math., 164(1):51–229, 2006.
       5   David A. Cohen, Martin C. Cooper, Páidí Creed, Peter Jeavons, and Stanislav Živný. An
           algebraic theory of complexity for discrete optimisation. SIAM Journal on Computing,
           42(5):915–1939, 2013. URL: http://zivny.cz/publications/cccjz13sicomp-preprint.
           pdf, doi:10.1137/130906398.
       6   David A. Cohen, Martin C. Cooper, Páidí Creed, Dániel Marx, and András Z. Salamon.
           The tractability of CSP classes defined by forbidden patterns. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR),
           45:47–78, 2012. doi:10.1613/jair.3651.
       7   David A. Cohen, Martin C. Cooper, Guillaume Escamoche, and Stanislav Živný. Variable
           and value elimination in binary constraint satisfaction via forbidden patterns. Journal
           of Computer and System Sciences, 81(7):1127–1143, 2015. URL: http://zivny.cz/
           publications/ccez15jcss-preprint.pdf, doi:10.1016/j.jcss.2015.02.001.
       8   David A. Cohen, Martin C. Cooper, Martin J. Green, and Dániel Marx. On guaranteeing
           polynomially bounded search tree size. In Jimmy Ho-Man Lee, editor, CP 2011, volume
           6876 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 160–171. Springer, 2011. doi:10.1007/
           978-3-642-23786-7_14.
       9   David A. Cohen, Martin C. Cooper, Peter G. Jeavons, and Stanislav Živný. Tractable
           classes of binary CSPs defined by excluded topological minors. In Qiang Yang and Michael
           Wooldridge, editors, IJCAI 2015, pages 1945–1951. AAAI Press, 2015. URL: http://
           ijcai.org/papers15/Abstracts/IJCAI15-276.html.
      10   David A. Cohen, Peter Jeavons, Christopher Jefferson, Karen E. Petrie, and Barbara M.
           Smith. Symmetry definitions for constraint satisfaction problems. Constraints, 11(2-3):115–
           137, 2006. doi:10.1007/s10601-006-8059-8.
      11   David A. Cohen and Peter G. Jeavons. The complexity of constraint languages. In Francesca
           Rossi, Peter van Beek, and Toby Walsh, editors, Handbook of Constraint Programming,
           pages 245–280. Elsevier, 2006.
      12   Martin C. Cooper. Beyond consistency and substitutability. In Barry O’Sullivan, editor,
           CP 2014, volume 8656 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 256–271. Springer,
           2014. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-10428-7_20.
      13   Martin C. Cooper, David A. Cohen, and Peter Jeavons. Characterising tractable constraints.
           Artif. Intell., 65(2):347–361, 1994. doi:10.1016/0004-3702(94)90021-3.
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                                133


14   Martin C. Cooper, Aymeric Duchein, Achref El Mouelhi, Guillaume Escamocher, Cyril
     Terrioux, and Bruno Zanuttini. Broken triangles: From value merging to a tractable class
     of general-arity constraint satisfaction problems. Artificial Intelligence, 234:196–218, 2016.
15   Martin C. Cooper and Guillaume Escamocher. Characterising the complexity of constraint
     satisfaction problems defined by 2-constraint forbidden patterns. Discrete Applied Math-
     ematics, 184:89–113, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.dam.2014.10.035.
16   Martin C. Cooper, Peter G. Jeavons, and András Z. Salamon. Generalizing constraint
     satisfaction on trees: Hybrid tractability and variable elimination. Artif. Intell., 174(9-
     10):570–584, 2010. doi:10.1016/j.artint.2010.03.002.
17   Martin C. Cooper, Philippe Jégou, and Cyril Terrioux. A microstructure-based family of
     tractable classes for CSPs. In Gilles Pesant, editor, CP 2015, volume 9255 of Lecture Notes
     in Computer Science, pages 74–88. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-23219-5_6.
18   Martin C. Cooper and Stanislav Živný. Hybrid tractability of valued constraint problems.
     Artificial Intelligence, 175(9-10):1555–1569, 2011. URL: http://zivny.cz/publications/
     cz11aij-preprint.pdf, doi:10.1016/j.artint.2011.02.003.
19   Martin C. Cooper and Stanislav Živný. Tractable triangles and cross-free convexity in
     discrete optimisation. J. Artif. Intell. Res. (JAIR), 44:455–490, 2012. doi:10.1613/jair.
     3598.
20   Martin C. Cooper and Stanislav Živný. The power of arc consistency for CSPs defined by
     partially-ordered forbidden patterns. In 31st Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in
     Computer Science, LICS, 2016.
21   Víctor Dalmau and Daniel K. Ford. Generalized satisfability with limited occurrences
     per variable: A study through delta-matroid parity. In Proceedings of the 28th In-
     ternational Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS’03),
     volume 2747 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 358–367. Springer, 2003. doi:
     10.1007/978-3-540-45138-9_30.
22   Philippe David. Using pivot consistency to decompose and solve functional CSPs. J. Artif.
     Intell. Res. (JAIR), 2:447–474, 1995. doi:10.1613/jair.167.
23   Rina Dechter. From local to global consistency. Artif. Intell., 55(1):87–108, 1992. doi:
     10.1016/0004-3702(92)90043-W.
24   Rina Dechter. Constraint processing. Elsevier Morgan Kaufmann, 2003. URL: http:
     //www.elsevier.com/wps/find/bookdescription.agents/678024/description.
25   Reinhard Diestel. Graph Theory. Springer, fourth edition, 2010.
26   Zdeněk Dvořák and Martin Kupec. On Planar Boolean CSP. In Proceedings of the 42nd
     International Colloquium on Automata, Languages and Programming (ICALP’15), volume
     9134 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 432–443. Springer, 2015.
27   Tomás Feder. Fanout limitations on constraint systems. Theoretical Computer Science,
     255(1-2):281–293, 2001. doi:10.1016/S0304-3975(99)00288-1.
28   Eugene C. Freuder. A sufficient condition for backtrack-free search. J. ACM, 29(1):24–32,
     1982.
29   Eugene C. Freuder. A sufficient condition for backtrack-bounded search. J. ACM, 32:755–
     761, 1985.
30   Peter Fulla and Stanislav Živný. On Planar Valued CSPs. In Proceedings of the 41st
     International Symposium on Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science (MFCS’16),
     volume 58 of LIPIcs, pages 39:1–39:14. Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum fuer Informatik,
     2016. Full version arXiv:1602.06323. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2016.39.
31   Martin J. Green and David A. Cohen. Domain permutation reduction for constraint satis-
     faction problems. Artif. Intell., 172(8-9):1094–1118, 2008.
32   Martin Grohe. The complexity of homomorphism and constraint satisfaction problems seen
     from the other side. J. ACM, 54(1):1–24, March 2007.




                                                                                                      Chapter 04
134   Hybrid Tractable Classes of Constraint Problems


      33   Martin Grötschel, Laszlo Lovasz, and Alexander Schrijver. The ellipsoid method and its
           consequences in combinatorial optimization. Combinatorica, 1:169–198, 1981.
      34   Pavol Hell and Jaroslav Nešetřil. Colouring, constraint satisfaction, and complexity. Com-
           puter Science Review, 2(3):143–163, 2008. doi:10.1016/j.cosrev.2008.10.003.
      35   Pawel M. Idziak, Petar Markovic, Ralph McKenzie, Matthew Valeriote, and Ross Willard.
           Tractability and learnability arising from algebras with few subpowers. SIAM J. Comput.,
           39(7):3023–3037, 2010. doi:10.1137/090775646.
      36   Peter G. Jeavons and Martin C. Cooper. Tractable constraints on ordered domains. Artif.
           Intell., 79(2):327–339, 1995.
      37   Philippe Jégou. Decomposition of domains based on the micro-structure of finite constraint-
           satisfaction problems. In Richard Fikes and Wendy G. Lehnert, editors, Proceedings of the
           11th National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’93), pages 731–736. AAAI Press /
           The MIT Press, 1993. URL: http://www.aaai.org/Library/AAAI/1993/aaai93-109.
           php.
      38   Alexandr Kazda, Vladimir Kolmogorov, and Michal Rolínek. Even delta-matroids and
           the complexity of planar Boolean CSPs. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual ACM-SIAM
           Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA’17), 2017.
      39   Vladimir Kolmogorov, Michal Rolínek, and Rustem Takhanov. Effectiveness of structural
           restrictions for hybrid CSPs. In Proceedings of the 26th International Symposium on Al-
           gorithms and Computation (ISAAC’15), volume 9472 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
           pages 566–577. Springer, 2015. doi:10.1007/978-3-662-48971-0_48.
      40   Vladimir Kolmogorov, Johan Thapper, and Stanislav Živný. The power of linear pro-
           gramming for general-valued csps. SIAM J. Comput., 44(1):1–36, 2015. doi:10.1137/
           130945648.
      41   Vladimir Kolmogorov and Stanislav Živný. The complexity of conservative valued CSPs.
           Journal of the ACM, 60(2), 2013. Article No. 10. URL: http://zivny.cz/publications/
           kz13jacm-preprint.pdf, doi:10.1145/2450142.2450146.
      42   Andrei Krokhin and Stanislav Živný. The complexity of valued CSPs. In Andrei Krokhin
           and Stanislav Živný, editors, The Constraint Satisfaction Problem: Complexity and Ap-
           proximability, volume 7 of Dagstuhl Follow-Ups, pages 229–261. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-
           Zentrum fuer Informatik, Dagstuhl, Germany, 2017. doi:10.4230/DFU.Vol7.15301.229.
      43   Achref El Mouelhi, Philippe Jégou, and Cyril Terrioux. Different classes of graphs to
           represent microstructures for CSPs. In Madalina Croitoru, Sebastian Rudolph, Stefan
           Woltran, and Christophe Gonzales, editors, Graph Structures for Knowledge Representation
           and Reasoning – Third International Workshop, GKR 2013, volume 8323 of Lecture Notes
           in Computer Science, pages 21–38. Springer, 2013. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04534-4_3.
      44   Achref El Mouelhi, Philippe Jégou, and Cyril Terrioux. A hybrid tractable class for non-
           binary CSPs. Constraints, 20(4):383–413, 2015. doi:10.1007/s10601-015-9185-y.
      45   Kazuo Murota. Discrete Convex Analysis. SIAM, 2003.
      46   Wady Naanaa. Unifying and extending hybrid tractable classes of CSPs. J. Exp. Theor.
           Artif. Intell., 25(4):407–424, 2013.
      47   Justin K. Pearson and Peter G. Jeavons. A survey of tractable constraint satisfaction
           problems. Technical Report CSD-TR-97-15, Royal Holloway, University of London, July
           1997.
      48   Jean-Charles Régin. A filtering algorithm for constraints of difference in CSPs. In 12th
           National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI’94), volume 1, pages 362–367, 1994.
      49   Neil Robertson and Paul D. Seymour. Graph minors. XX. Wagner’s conjecture. J. Comb.
           Theory, Ser. B, 92(2):325–357, 2004. doi:10.1016/j.jctb.2004.08.001.
M. C. Cooper and S. Živný                                                                          135


50   András Z. Salamon and Peter G. Jeavons. Perfect constraints are tractable. In Peter J.
     Stuckey, editor, CP 2008, volume 5202 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 524–
     528. Springer, 2008. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-85958-1_35.
51   Alexander Schrijver. Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency, volume 24 of
     Algorithms and Combinatorics. Springer, 2003.
52   Rustem Takhanov. Hybrid (V)CSPs and algebraic reductions. CoRR, abs/1506.06540,
     2015. URL: http://arxiv.org/abs/1506.06540.
53   Johan Thapper and Stanislav Živný. The complexity of finite-valued CSPs. Journal
     of the ACM, 63(4), 2016. Article No. 37. URL: http://zivny.cz/publications/
     tz16jacm-preprint.pdf, doi:10.1145/2974019.
54   Peter van Beek and Rina Dechter. Constraint tightness and looseness versus local and
     global consistency. J. ACM, 44(4):549–566, 1997. doi:10.1145/263867.263499.
55   Willem Jan van Hoeve and Irit Katriel. Global constraints. In Francesca Rossi, Peter van
     Beek, and Toby Walsh, editors, Handbook of Constraint Programming, chapter 6, pages
     169–208. Elsevier, 2006.
56   Willem Jan van Hoeve, Gilles Pesant, and Louis-Martin Rousseau. On global warming:
     Flow-based soft global constraints. Journal of Heuristics, 12(4-5):347–373, 2006. doi:
     10.1007/s10732-006-6550-4.




                                                                                                Chapter 04
