                        Interface-based Design?

                     Luca de Alfaro1 and Thomas A. Henzinger2,3
              1                    2                  3
                  UC Santa Cruz        UC Berkeley        EPFL Switzerland



        Abstract. Surveying results from [5] and [6], we motivate and intro-
        duce the theory behind formalizing rich interfaces for software and hard-
        ware components. Rich interfaces specify the protocol aspects of compo-
        nent interaction. Their formalization, called interface automata, permits
        a compiler to check the compatibility of component interaction protocols.
        Interface automata support incremental design and independent imple-
        mentability. Incremental design means that the compatibility checking of
        interfaces can proceed for partial system descriptions, without knowing
        the interfaces of all components. Independent implementability means
        that compatible interfaces can be refined separately, while still main-
        taining compatibility.


1     Introduction

Interfaces play a central role in the component-based design of software and
hardware systems. We say that two or more components are compatible if they
work together properly. Good interface design is based on two principles. First,
an interface should expose enough information about a component as to make it
possible to predict if two or more components are compatible by looking only at
their interfaces. Second, an interface should not expose more information about
a component than is required by the first principle.
    The technical realization of these principles depends, of course, on what it
means for two or more components to “work together properly.” A simple inter-
pretation is offered by typed programming languages: a component that imple-
ments a function and a component that calls the function are compatible if the
function definition and the function call agree on the number, order, and types
of the parameters. We discuss richer notions of compatibility, which specify in
addition to type information, also protocol information about how a component
must be used. For example, the interface of a file server with the two methods
open-file and read-file may stipulate that the method read-file must not
be called before the method open-file has been called. Symmetrically, the in-
terface of a client specifies the possible behaviors of the client in terms of which
orderings of open-file and read-file calls may occur during its execution.
?
    This research was supported in part by the ONR grant N00014-02-1-0671 and by
    the NSF grants CCR-0234690, CCR-9988172, and CCR-0225610. A version of this
    paper appeared in Engineering Theories of Software-Intensive Systems (edited by
    Manfred Broy et al.), NATO Science Series, Volume 195, Springer-Verlag, 2005.
Given such server and client interfaces, a compiler can check statically if the
server and the client fit together.
    Interfaces that expose protocol information about component interaction can
be specified naturally in an automaton-based language [5]. In this article, we give
a tutorial introduction to such interface automata.

2     Interface Languages
We begin by introducing two requirements on interface languages. An interface
language should support incremental design and independent implementability.
With each interface language we present, we will verify that both of these re-
quirements are met.

2.1    Incremental design
A component is typically an open system, i.e., it has some free inputs, which
are provided by other components. Incremental design is supported if we can
check the compatibility of two or more component interfaces without specifying
interfaces for all components, i.e., without closing the system. The unspecified
component interfaces may later be added one by one, as long as throughout
the process, the set of specified interfaces stays compatible. More precisely, the
property of incremental design requires that if the interfaces in a set F (repre-
senting the complete, closed design) are compatible, then the interfaces in every
subset G ⊆ F (representing a partial, open design) are compatible. This yields
an existential interpretation of interface compatibility: the interfaces in an open
set G of interfaces (i.e., a set with free inputs) are compatible if there exists
an interface E (representing an environment that provides all free inputs to the
interfaces in G) such that the interfaces in the closed set G ∪ {E} (without free
inputs) are compatible.1
    Incremental design suggests that we model compatibility as a symmetric bi-
nary relation ∼ between interfaces, and composition as a binary partial function
|| on interfaces. If two interfaces F and G are compatible, that is, F ∼ G, then
F ||G is defined and denotes the resulting composite interface. Now the property
of incremental design reads as follows:
      For all interfaces F , G, H, and I, if F ∼ G and H ∼ I and F ||G ∼
      H||I, then F ∼ H and G ∼ I and F ||H ∼ G||I.
This property ensures that the compatible components of a system can be put
together in any order.2
1
  It is important to emphasize the existential interpretation of the free inputs of in-
  terfaces, because this deviates from the standard, universal interpretation of free
  inputs in specifications [5]. While a specification of an open system is well-formed if
  it can be realized for all input values, an interface is well-formed if it is compatible
  to some environment. In other words, for interfaces, the environment is helpful, not
  adversarial.
2
  We could formalize the property of incremental design, instead, as associativity of
  interface composition [5]. We chose our formalization, because it does not require an
2.2     Independent implementability
Recall the first principle of interface design, namely, that the information con-
tained in interfaces should suffice to check if two or more components are com-
patible. This principle can be formalized as follows: if F and G are compatible
interfaces, and F 0 is a component that conforms to interface F , and G0 is a
component that conforms to interface G, then F 0 and G0 are compatible com-
ponents, and moreover, the composition F 0 ||G0 of the two components conforms
to the composite interface F ||G. We call this the property of independent im-
plementability, because it enables the outsourcing of the implementation of the
components F 0 and G0 to two different vendors: as long as the vendors conform
to the provided interfaces F and G, respectively, their products will fit together,
even if the vendors do not communicate with each other.
    For simplicity, in this article we gloss over the differences between interfaces
and components, and express both in the same language; that is, we consider
components to be simply more detailed interfaces.3 For this purpose, we use a
refinement preorder between interfaces: if F  F 0 , then the interface F 0 refines
the interface F . An interface may be refined into an implementation in several
steps. As the refinement relation is a preorder, it is transitive. The property of
independent implementability reads as follows:
      For all interfaces F , F 0 , G, and G0 , if F ∼ G and F  F 0 and G  G0 ,
      then F 0 ∼ G0 and F ||G  F 0 ||G0 .
This property ensures that compatible interfaces can always be refined sepa-
rately.4


3     Assume/Guarantee Interfaces
We illustrate the properties of incremental design and independent implementabil-
ity through a simple, stateless interface language called assume/guarantee (A/G,
for short) interfaces [6]. Assume/guarantee interfaces have input and output
variables. An A/G interface puts a constraint on the environment through a
predicate φI on its input variables: the environment is expected to provide in-
puts that satisfy φI . In return, the interface communicates to the environment
  explicit notion of equality or equivalence between interfaces. Implicitly, according to
  our formalization, two interfaces F and G are equivalent if they are compatible with
  same interfaces, that is, if for all interfaces H, we have F ∼ H iff G ∼ H. It can
  be shown that if the property of incremental design holds, then for all interfaces F ,
  G, and H, if F ∼ G and F ||G ∼ H, then G ∼ H and F ∼ G||H and the two
  interfaces (F ||G)||H and F ||(G||H) are equivalent in the specified sense.
3
  A discussion about interfaces versus components can be found in [6].
4
  The property of independent implementability is a compositionality property [6].
  It should be noted that the “direction” of interface compositionality is top-down,
  from more abstract to more refined interfaces: if F ∼ G and F  F 0 and G  G0 ,
  then F 0 ∼ G0 . This is in contrast to the bottom-up compositionality of many other
  formalisms: if F 0 ∼ G0 and F 0  F and G0  G, then F ∼ G.
a constraint φO on its output variables: it vouches to provide only outputs that
satisfy φO . In other words, the input assumption φI represents a precondition,
and the output guarantee φO a postcondition.

Definition 1. An A/G interface F = hX I , X O , φI , φO i consists of
 – two disjoint sets X I and X O of input and output variables;
 – a satisfiable predicate φI over X I called input assumption;
 – a satisfiable predicate φO over X O called output guarantee.

     Note that input assumptions, like output guarantees, are required to be sat-
isfiable, not valid. An input assumption is satisfiable if it can be met by some
environment. Hence, for every A/G interface there is a context in which it can
be used. On the other hand, in general not all environments will satisfy the input
assumption; that is, the interface puts a constraint on the environment.

Example 1. A division component with two inputs x and y, and an output z,
might have an A/G interface with the input assumption y 6= 0 and the output
guarantee true (which is trivially satisfied by all output values). The input
assumption y 6= 0 ensures that the component is used only in contexts that
provide non-zero divisors. 2

   In the following, when referring to the components of several interfaces, we
use the interface name as subscript to identify ownership. For example, the input
assumption of an interface F is denoted by φIF .

3.1   Compatibility and composition
We define the composition of A/G interfaces in several steps. First, two A/G
interfaces are syntactically composable if their output variables are disjoint. In
general, some outputs of one interface will provide inputs to the other interface,
and some inputs will remain free in the composition. Second, two A/G interfaces
F and G are semantically compatible if whenever one interface provides inputs
to the other interface, then the output guarantee of the former implies the input
assumption of the latter. Consider first the closed case, that all inputs of F are
outputs of G, and vice versa. Then F and G are compatible if the closed formula

                      (∀XFO ∪ XG
                               O
                                 )(φO    O     I    I
                                    F ∧ φG ⇒ φ F ∧ φG )                       (ψ)

is true. In the open case, where some inputs of F and G are left free, the formula
(ψ) has free input variables. As discussed above, to support incremental design,
the two interfaces F and G are compatible if they can be used together in some
context, i.e., if there is a environment that makes (ψ) true by providing helpful
input values. Thus, in the open case, the A/G interfaces F and G are compatible
if the formula (ψ) is satisfiable. Then, the formula (ψ) is the input assumption
of the composite interface F ||G, because it encodes the weakest condition on the
environment of F ||G that makes F and G work together.
Definition 2. Two A/G interfaces F and G are composable if XFO ∩ XG O
                                                                      =
∅. Two A/G interfaces F and G are compatible, written F ∼ G, if they are
composable and the formula

                       (∀XFO ∪ XG
                                O
                                  )(φO    O     I    I
                                     F ∧ φG ⇒ φ F ∧ φG )                          (ψ)

is satisfiable. The composition F ||G of two compatible A/G interfaces F and G
is the A/G interface with
 – XFI ||G = (XFI ∪ XGI
                         )\XFO||G;
 – XFO||G = XFO ∪ XG O
                        ;
    I
 – φF ||G = ψ;
 – φO         O    O
    F ||G = φF ∧ φG .

   Note that the compatibility relation ∼ is symmetric.

Example 2. Let F be the A/G interface without input variables, the single out-
put variable x, and the output guarantee true. Let G be the A/G interface with
the two input variables x and y, the input assumption x = 0 ⇒ y = 0, and no
output variables. Then F and G are compatible, because the formula

                        (∀x)(true ⇒ (x = 0 ⇒ y = 0))

simplifies to y = 0, which is satisfiable. Note that the predicate y = 0 expresses
the weakest input assumption that the composite interface needs to make in
order to ensure that the input assumption x = 0 ⇒ y = 0 of G is satisfied.
This is because F makes no guarantees about x; in particular, it might provide
outputs x that are 0, and it might provide outputs x that are different from 0.
   The composition F ||G has the input variable y, the input assumption y = 0,
the output variable x, and the output guarantee true. 2

   The following theorem shows that the A/G interfaces support incremental
design.

Theorem 1. For all A/G interfaces F , G, H, and I, if F ∼ G and H ∼ I and
F ||G ∼ H||I, then F ∼ H and G ∼ I and F ||H ∼ G||I.

Proof sketch. Note that from the premises of the theorem it follows that (1) the
                 O
four sets XFO , XG    O
                   , XH , and XIO are pairwise disjoint; and (2) the formula

    (∀XFO ∪ XG
             O    O
               ∪ XH ∪ XIO )(φO    O    O    O     I    I    I    I
                             F ∧ φG ∧ φH ∧ φI ⇒ φ F ∧ φG ∧ φH ∧ φI )

is satisfiable. To prove from this that, say, the formula

                       (∀XFO ∪ XH
                                O
                                  )(φO    O     I    I
                                     F ∧ φH ⇒ φ F ∧ φH )

                                                                  O
is satisfiable, choose the values for the variables in XFI ||H ∩ XG||I so that φO    O
                                                                                G ∧ φI
is true. 2
3.2   Refinement

Besides composition, the second operation on interfaces is refinement. Refine-
ment between A/G interfaces is, like subtyping for function types, defined in an
input/output contravariant fashion: an implementation must accept all inputs
that the specification accepts, and it may produce only outputs that the speci-
fication allows. Hence, to refine an A/G interface, the input assumption can be
weakened, and the output guarantee can be strengthened.

Definition 3. An A/G interface F 0 refines an A/G interface F , written F 
F 0 , if

  (1) XFI ⊆ XFI 0 and XFO ⊇ XFO0 ;
  (2) φIF ⇒ φIF 0 and φO    O
                       F ⇐ φF 0 .


    Refinement between A/G interfaces is a preorder (i.e., reflexive and transi-
tive). The following theorem shows that the A/G interfaces support independent
implementability.

Theorem 2. For all A/G interfaces F , G, and F 0 , if F ∼ G and F  F 0 , then
F 0 ∼ G and F ||G  F 0 ||G.

Proof sketch. From XFO ∩ XGO
                             = ∅ and XFO ⊇ XFO0 , it follows that XFO0 ∩ XG
                                                                          O
                                                                            = ∅.
                                          I
Choose values for the input variables in XF ||G so that

                      (∀XFO ∪ XG
                               O
                                 )(φO    O    I    I
                                    F ∧ φG ⇒ φF ∧ φG ).


From XFI ⊆ XFI 0 and XFO ⊇ XFO0 , it follows that XFI ||G ⊆ XFI 0 ||G . Choose
arbitrary values for all variables not in XFI ||G . Then φO      O     I      I
                                                          F 0 ∧ φG ⇒ φ F 0 ∧ φG
              O       O        O    O        I       I      I      I
follows from φF 0 ⇒ φF and φF ∧ φG ⇒ φF ∧ φG and φF ⇒ φF 0 . This proves
that F 0 ∼ G. The proof that F ||G  F 0 ||G is straight-forward. 2

    Note that the contravariant definition of refinement is needed for Theorem 7
to hold, as input assumptions and output guarantees occur on two different sides
of the implication in the formula (ψ).
    We have not fixed the types of variables, nor the theory in which input as-
sumptions or output guarantees are written. Checking the compatibility of A/G
interfaces, and checking refinement between A/G interfaces, requires a procedure
that decides the satisfiability of universal formulas in that theory. For example,
if all variables are boolean, then the input assumptions and output guarantees
are quantifier-free boolean formulas. In this case, compatibility checking requires
the evaluation of ∃∀ boolean formulas (namely, satisfiability checking of the uni-
versal formula (ψ)), and refinement checking requires the evaluation of ∀ boolean
formulas (namely, validity checking of the two implications of Definition 6).
4    Automaton Interfaces

We now present the stateful interface language called interface automata [5]. An
interface automaton is an edge-labeled digraph whose vertices represent interface
states, whose edges represent interface transitions, and whose labels represent ac-
tion names. The actions are partitioned into input, output, and internal actions.
The internal actions are “hidden”: they cannot be observed by the environment.
The syntax of interface automata is identical to the syntax of I/O automata [8],
but composition will be defined differently.

Definition 4. An interface automaton F = hQ, q 0 , AI , AO , AH , δi consists of

 – a finite set Q of states;
 – an initial state q 0 ∈ Q;
 – three pairwise disjoint sets AI , AO , and AH of input, output, and hidden
   actions;
 – a set δ ⊆ Q × A × Q of transitions, where A = AI ∪ AO ∪ AH is the set of
   all actions.

We require that the automaton F be input-deterministic, that is, for all states
q, q 0 , q 00 ∈ Q and all input actions a ∈ AI , if (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δ and (q, a, q 00 ) ∈ δ, then
q 0 = q 00 .

    An action a ∈ A is enabled at a state q ∈ Q if there exists a state q 0 ∈ Q such
that (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δ. Given a state q ∈ Q, we write AI (q) (resp. AO (q); AH (q))
for the set of input (resp. output; hidden) actions that are enabled at q. Unlike
I/O automata, an interface automaton is not required to be input-enabled; that
is, we do not require that AI (q) = AI for all states q ∈ Q. Rather, we use
the set AI (q) to specify the input actions that are accepted at state q; that is,
an interface automaton encodes the assumption that, when F is in state q, the
environment does not provide an input action that is not enabled at q.

Example 3. We model a software component that implements a message-trans-
mission service. The component has a method “send” for sending messages.
When this method is called, the component returns either “ok ” or “fail .” To
perform this service, the component relies on a communication channel that
provides the method “trnsmt” for transmitting messages. The two possible re-
turn values are “ack ,” which indicates a successful transmission, and “nack ,”
which indicates a failure. When the method “send” is called, the component
tries to transmit the message, and if the first transmission fails, it tries again. If
both transmissions fail, the component reports failure. The interface automaton
modeling this component is called TryTwice and shown in Figure 1.
    The interface automaton TryTwice has the three input actions “send ,” “ack ,”
and “nack ”; the three output actions “trnsmt,” “ok ,” and “fail ”; and no hidden
actions. It has seven states, with state 0 being initial (marked by an arrow
without source). On the transitions, we append to the name of the action label
the symbol “?” (resp. “!”; “;”) to indicate that the transition is input (resp.
     send                     ok                          fail



                              5
                  ok!                                ack?

                                       ack?

0   send?     1     trnsmt!   2        nack?   3     trnsmt!     4



                  fail!       6                      nack?




     trnsmt                   ack                         nack

    Fig. 1. The interface automaton TryTwice.




                              send!


                          0              1


                              ok?




                  send            ok               fail

     Fig. 2. The interface automaton Client.
output; hidden). Note how the automaton expresses in a straight-forward manner
the above informal description of the message-passing service. The input “send”
is accepted only in state 0; that is, the component expects a client to send a
second message only after it has received an “ok ” or “fail ” response.
    The interface automaton Client of Figure 2 shows a possible client of the
message-passing service. It has the input actions “ok ” and “fail ,” the output
action “send,” and again no hidden actions. This particular client expects mes-
sages to be sent successfully, and makes no provisions for handling failures: after
calling the method “send,” it accepts the return value “ok ,” but does not accept
the return value “fail .” The expectation that the return value is always “ok ”
is an assumption by the component Client about its environment; that is, the
component Client is designed to be used only with message-transmission services
that cannot fail. 2

     An interface automaton F is closed if it has no input and output actions;
that is, if AI = AO = ∅. Closed interface automata do not interact with the
environment.
     An execution of the interface automaton F is a finite alternating sequence
q0 , a0 , q1 , a1 , . . . , qn of states and actions such that (qi , ai , qi+1 ) ∈ δ for all 0 ≤
i < n. The execution is autonomous if all its actions are output or hidden actions;
that is, if ai ∈ AO ∪ AH for all 0 ≤ i < n. Autonomous executions do not depend
on input actions. The execution is invisible if all its actions are hidden; that is, if
ai ∈ AH for all 0 ≤ i < n. A state q 0 ∈ Q is (autonomously; invisibly) reachable
from a state q ∈ Q if there exists an (autonomous; invisible) execution whose
first state is q, and whose last state is q 0 . The state q 0 is reachable in F if q 0 is
reachable from the initial state q 0 . In the definition of interface automata, it is
not required that all states be reachable. However, one is generally not interested
in states that are not reachable, and they can be removed.

4.1    Compatibility and composition
We define the composition of two interface automata only if their actions are
disjoint, except that an input action of one automaton may coincide with an
output action of the other automaton.
Definition 5. Two interface automata F and G are composable if
                             H
   (1) AH
        F ∩ AG = ∅ and AF ∩ AG = ∅;
        I    I
   (2) AF ∩ AG = ∅;
   (3) AO    O
        F ∩ AG = ∅.

    For two interface automata F and G, we let shared (F, G) = AF ∩ AG be
the set of common actions. If F and G are composable, then shared (F, G) =
               I    O
(AIG ∩AOF )∪(AF ∩AG ). We define the composition of interface automata in stages,
first defining the product automaton F ⊗ G. The two automata synchronize
on the actions in shared (F, G), and asynchronously interleave all other actions.
Shared actions become hidden in the product.
Definition 6. For two composable interface automata F and G, the product
F ⊗ G is the interface automaton with
 – QF ⊗G = QF × QG ;
 – qF0 ⊗G = (qF0 , qG     0
                            );
 – AF ⊗G = (AF ∪ AIG )\shared (F, G);
      I                I
                       O       O
 – AO F ⊗G = (AF ∪ AG )\shared (F, G);
      H              H        H
 – AF ⊗G = AF ∪ AG ∪ shared (F, G);
 – ((q, r), a, (q 0 , r0 )) ∈ δF ⊗G iff
         a 6∈ shared (F, G) and (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δF and r = r0 , or
         a 6∈ shared (F, G) and q = q 0 and (r, a, r0 ) ∈ δG , or
         a ∈ shared (F, G) and (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δF and (r, a, r0 ) ∈ δG .

    Let δFI = {(q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δ | a ∈ AIF } denote the set of input transitions of an
interface automaton F , and let δFO and δFH be defined similarly as the output and
hidden transitions of F . Then according to the definition of product automata,
each input transition of F ⊗ G is an input transition of either F or G; that is,
((q, r), a, (q 0 , r0 )) ∈ δFI ⊗G iff
    (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δFI and a 6∈ AO           0
                                 G and r = r ; or
           O              0           0    I
    a 6∈ AF and q = q and (r, a, r ) ∈ δG .
Each output transitions of F ⊗ G is an output transition of F or G; that is,
((q, r), a, (q 0 , r0 )) ∈ δFO⊗G iff
    (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δFO and a 6∈ AIG and r = r0 ; or
    a 6∈ AIF and q = q 0 and (r, a, r0 ) ∈ δG
                                            O
                                              .
Each hidden transition of F ⊗ G is either an input transition of F that is an
output transition of G, or vice versa, or it is a hidden transition of F or G; that
is, ((q, r), a, (q 0 , r0 )) ∈ δFH⊗G iff
    (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δFI and (r, a, r0 ) ∈ δG
                                          O
                                            ; or
             0       O             0      I
    (q, a, q ) ∈ δF and (r, a, r ) ∈ δG     ; or
    (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δFH and r = r0 ; or
    q = q 0 and (r, a, r0 ) ∈ δGH
                                   .

Example 4. The product TryTwice ⊗ Client of the interface automata TryTwice
and Client from Figures 1 and 2 is shown in Figure 3. Each state of the product
consists of a state of TryTwice together with a state of Client. Only the reachable
states of the product automaton are shown. Each transition of the product is
either a joint “send” transition, which represents the call of the method “send”
by Client, or a joint “ok ” transition, which represents the termination of the
method “send” with return value “ok ,” or a transition of TryTwice calling the
method “trnsmt” of the (unspecified) communication channel, or a transition of
TryTwice receiving the return value “ack ” or “nack ” from the channel.
    Consider the following sequence of events. The component Client calls the
method “send ”; then TryTwice calls twice the method “trnsmt” and receives
                                  5
                       ok;                          ack?

                                        ack?

    0   send;      1    trnsmt!   2     nack?   3   trnsmt!   4




                                  6                 nack?




          trnsmt                  ack                  nack

    Fig. 3. The product automaton TryTwice ⊗ Client.




                                  5
                       ok;                          ack?

                                        ack?

    0   send;      1    trnsmt!   2     nack?   3   trnsmt!   4




          trnsmt                  ack                  nack

Fig. 4. The composite interface automaton TryTwice||Client .
twice the return value “nack ,” indicating transmission failure. This sequence
of events brings us to state 6 of the product automaton, which corresponds to
state 6 of TryTwice and state 1 of Client . In state 6, the component TryTwice
tries to report failure by returning “fail ,” but not expecting failure, the com-
ponent Client does not accept the return value “fail ” in state 1. Hence the
product state 6 has no outgoing edges; it is called an error state, because at
product state 6, the component TryTwice violates the assumption made by the
component Client about the inputs that Client receives. 2

   This example illustrates that, as interface automata are not necessarily input-
enabled, in the product of two interface automata, one of the automata may
produce an output action that is in the input alphabet of the other automaton,
but is not accepted.

Definition 7. Given two composable interface automata F and G, a product
state (q, r) ∈ QF × QG is an error state of the product automaton F ⊗ G if there
exists an action a ∈ shared (F, G) such that either a ∈ AO                I
                                                          F (q) and a 6∈ AG (r), or
       I               O
a 6∈ AF (q) and a ∈ AG (r). We write error (F, G) for the set of error states of
the product automaton F ⊗ G.

    If the product F ⊗G contains no reachable error states, then the two interface
automata F and G satisfy each other’s input assumptions and are thus compat-
ible. On the other hand, if F ⊗ G is closed and contains a reachable error state,
then F and G are incompatible. The interesting case arises when F ⊗ G contains
reachable error states, but is not closed. The fact that a state in error (F, G) is
reachable does not necessarily indicate an incompatibility, because by providing
appropriate inputs, the environment of F ⊗G may be able to ensure that no error
state is encountered in the product. We therefore define the set of incompatible
states of F ⊗ G as those states from which no environment can prevent that an
error state may be entered. First, the error states of F ⊗ G are incompatible.
Second, all states from which a sequence of output or hidden actions of F ⊗ G
leads to an error state are also incompatible, because the product automaton
may choose to traverse that sequence in every environment. On the other hand,
if an error state is only reachable via an input action, then a helpful environment
can choose not to provide that action, thus avoiding the error state.

Definition 8. Given two composable interface automata F and G, a product
state (q, r) ∈ QF × QG is a compatible state of the product automaton F ⊗ G if
there exists no error state (q 0 , r0 ) ∈ error (F, G) that is autonomously reachable
from (q, r). Two interface automata F and G are compatible, written F ∼ G,
if they are composable and the initial state of the product automaton F ⊗ G is
compatible.

   Note that the compatibility relation ∼ is symmetric.
   If two composable interface automata F and G are compatible, then there is
an environment E such that
    (1) E is composable with F ⊗ G;
    (2) (F ⊗ G) ⊗ E is closed;
    (3) for all states ((q, r), s) ∈ (QF × QG ) × QE that are reachable in (F ⊗
        G)⊗E, we have (q, r) 6∈ error (F, G) and ((q, r), s) 6∈ error (F ⊗G, E).
The third condition ensures that (3a) E prevents the error states of F ⊗ G from
being entered, and (3b) E accepts all outputs of F ⊗ G and does not provide
inputs that are not accepted by F ⊗ G. An interface automaton that satisfies
the conditions (1)–(3) is called a legal environment for F ⊗ G. The existence of
a legal environment shows that two compatible interfaces can be used together
in some context.
    For compatible interface automata F and G, there is always a trivial legal
environment, which provides no inputs to F ⊗ G. Formally, empty closure of F
and G is the interface automaton close(F, G) with
    Qclose(F,G) = {0};
     0
    qclose(F,G)  = 0;
    Aclose(F,G) = AO
      I
                      F ⊗G ;
    AOclose(F,G) =  A I
                      F ⊗G ;
      H
    Aclose(F,G) = ∅;
    δclose(F,G) = {(0, a, 0) | a ∈ AIclose(F,G) }.

The empty closure close(F, G) has a single state (arbitrarily named 0), which
is its initial state. It accepts all output actions of F ⊗ G as inputs, but does
not issue any outputs. All states that are reachable in (F ⊗ G) ⊗ close(F, G) are
reachable solely by output and hidden actions of F ⊗ G. Thus, if the initial state
of F ⊗ G is compatible, then each state that is reachable in (F ⊗ G) ⊗ close(F, G)
must not correspond to an error state of F ⊗ G. On the other hand, if the initial
state of F ⊗ G is not compatible, then some error state of F ⊗ Q is reachable in
every environment that does not constrain the outputs of F ⊗ G, in particular,
in (F ⊗ G) ⊗ close(F, G). Consequently, two interface automata F and G are
compatible iff for all states (q, r) ∈ QF × QG such that ((q, r), 0) is reachable in
(F ⊗ G) ⊗ close(F, G), we have (q, r) 6∈ error (F, G).
    The composition of two compatible interface automata is obtained by re-
stricting the product of the two automata to the set of compatible states.

Definition 9. Given two compatible interface automata F and G, the compo-
sition F ||G is the interface automaton that results from the product F ⊗ G by
removing all transitions (q, a, q 0 ) ∈ δF ⊗G such that
  (1) q is a compatible state of the product F ⊗ G;
  (2) a ∈ AIF ⊗G is an input action of the product;
  (3) q 0 is not a compatible state of F ⊗ G.

Example 5. In the product automaton TryTwice ⊗ Client from Figure 3, state 6
is an error state, and thus not compatible. However, the product TryTwice ⊗
Client is not closed, because its environment —the communication channel—
provides “ack ” and “nack ” inputs. The environment that provides input “ack ”
(or no input at all) at the product state 4 ensures that the error state 6 is not
entered. Hence, the product states 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 are compatible. Since
the initial state 0 of the product is compatible, the two interface automata
TryTwice and Client are compatible. The result of removing from TryTwice ⊗
Client the input transition to the incompatible state 6 is the interface automaton
TryTwice||Client shown in Figure 4.
    Note that restricting TryTwice ⊗ Client to its compatible states corresponds
to imposing an assumption on the environment, namely, that calls to the method
“send” never return twice in a row the value “nack .” Hence, when the two
interface automata TryTwice and Client are composed, the assumption of Client
that no failures occur is translated into the assumption of TryTwice||Client that
no two consecutive transmissions fail. The illustrates how the composition of
the interface automata TryTwice and Client propagates to the environment of
TryTwice||Client the assumptions that are necessary for the correct interaction
of TryTwice and Client . 2

    The definition of composition removes only transitions, not states, from the
product automaton. The removal of transitions, however, may render some states
unreachable, which can then be removed also. In particular, as far as reachable
states are concerned, the composition F ||G results from the product F ⊗ G by
removing all incompatible states; if the result is empty, then F and G are not
compatible. In general, the removal of input transitions from a product automa-
ton may render even some compatible states unreachable. Hence, the relevant
states of the composite automaton F ||G are those states of the product automa-
ton F ⊗ G which remain reachable after all incompatible states are removed.
Those states of the product automaton can be found in linear time, by forward
and backward traversals of the underlying graph [5]. Thus the compatibility of
two interface automata with m1 and m2 reachable transitions, respectively, can
be checked, and their composition constructed, in time O(m1 · m2 ).
    The following theorem shows that interface automata support incremental
design.
Theorem 3. For all interface automata F , G, H, and I, if F ∼ G and H ∼ I
and F ||G ∼ H||I, then F ∼ H and G ∼ I and F ||H ∼ G||I.
Proof sketch. For composability, note that from the premises of the theorem
it follows that AH                                                    I
                     i is disjoint from Aj for all j 6= i, that all Ai ’s are pairwise
                          O
disjoint, and that all Ai ’s are pairwise disjoint. Consider the product automaton
F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I; the associativity of ⊗ implies that parentheses do not matter.
Define a state (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 ) to be an error state of F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I if some pair
(pi , pj ) is an error state of the corresponding subproduct; e.g., if (p1 , p3 ) is an
error state of F ⊗H. Define a state p to be an incompatible state of F ⊗G⊗H ⊗I
if some error state of F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I is autonomously reachable from p, that is,
reachable via hidden and output transitions. For ` ≥ 0, define a state p to be a
rank-` incompatible state if some error state is autonomously reachable from p
in at most ` transitions.
    We show that under the premises of the theorem, the composition F ||G||H||I
is achieved, for any insertion of parentheses, by removing the incompatible states
from the product F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I. The proof proceeds in two steps. First, we show
that if some projection of a product state p = (p1 , p2 , p3 , p4 ) is an incompatible
state of the corresponding subproduct (say, F ⊗ G), then p is an incompatible
state of the full product F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I. Second, we show that if p is an in-
compatible state of F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I, and some input transitions are removed by
constructing the composition of any subproduct (say, F ||H), then even in the
product without the removed transitions, there remains an autonomous path
from p to an error state.
    (1) Consider a state p of the product F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I, and a projection p0 of p
which is a rank-` incompatible state of the corresponding subproduct. We show
that p is a rank-`0 incompatible state of F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I for some `0 ≤ `. Consider
a shortest autonomous path from p0 to an error state in the subproduct. There
are three cases. First, if p0 is an error state of the subproduct (rank 0), then p is
an error state of the full product. Second, if the first transition of the error path
from p0 in the subproduct corresponds to an output or hidden transition of the
full product, then the rank of the successor state is ` − 1 and the claim follows
by induction. Third, if the first transition of the error path from p0 is an output
transition of the subproduct which does not have a matching input transition in
the full product, then p is an error state of the full product and has rank 0.
    (2) Consider an incompatible state p of the product F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I. Suppose
that some input transitions are removed by constructing the composition of a
subproduct, and remove the corresponding transitions in the full product F ⊗
G ⊗ H ⊗ I. The only kind of transition that might be removed in this way is a
hidden transition (q, a, r) of the product whose projection onto the subproduct is
an input transition (q 0 , a, r0 ), which is matched in the full product by an output
transition. Once (q, a, r) is removed, the input action a is no longer enabled at
the state q 0 , because interface automata are input-deterministic. Hence in the
full product, the state q is an error state. Therefore even after the removal of
the transition (q, a, r) from the product F ⊗ G ⊗ H ⊗ I, there is an autonomous
path from p to an error state, namely, to q. 2
     As a consequence of Theorem 17, we can check whether k > 0 interface au-
tomata F1 , . . . , Fk are compatible by computing their composition F1 || · · · ||Fk
incrementally, by adding one interface automaton at a time. The potential ef-
ficiency of the incremental product construction lies in the fact that product
states can be pruned as soon as they become either incompatible, or unreachable
through the pruning of incompatible states. Thus, in some cases the exponential
explosion of states inherent in a product construction may be avoided.


4.2   Refinement

In the stateful input-enabled setting, refinement is usually defined as trace con-
tainment or simulation; this ensures that all output behaviors of the imple-
mentation are allowed by the specification. However, such definitions are not
appropriate in a non-input-enabled setting, such as interface automata: if one
were to require that the set of accepted inputs of the implementation is a sub-
set of the inputs allowed by the specification, then the implementation would
make stronger assumptions about the environment, and could not be used in all
contexts in which the specification is used.


                once                    send               ok                 fail



                   9’                                      5’
                         ok!                    ok!                        ack?

        ack?                                                    ack?

   8’     trnsmt! 7’     once?      send?      1’ trnsmt! 2’    nack?   3’ trnsmt! 4’
                                   0’

        nack?

                         fail!                  fail!      6’              nack?
                  10’



                        trnsmt                    ack                         nack

                        Fig. 5. The interface automaton OnceOrTwice.




Example 6. Consider the interface automaton OnceOrTwice of Figure 5. This
automaton represents a component that provides two services: the first is the try-
twice service “send” provided also by the automaton TryTwice of Figure 1; the
second is a try-once-only service “once” designed for messages that are useless
when stale. Clearly, we would like to define refinement so that OnceOrTwice is
a refinement of TryTwice, because the component OnceOrTwice implements
all services provided by the component TryTwice, and it is consistent with
TryTwice in their implementation. Hence, in all contexts in which TryTwice
is used, OnceOrTwice can be used instead. The language of OnceOrTwice, how-
ever, is not contained in the language of TryTwice; indeed, “once” is not even
an action of TryTwice. 2

    Therefore, for interface automata we define refinement in a contravariant
fashion: the implementation must accept more inputs, and provide fewer out-
puts, than the specification. For efficient checkability of refinement, we choose a
contravariant refinement relation in the spirit of simulation, rather than in the
spirit of language containment. This leads to the definition of refinement as al-
ternating simulation [1]. Roughly, an interface automaton F 0 refines an interface
automaton F if each input transition of F can be simulated by F 0 , and each
output transition of F 0 can be simulated by F . The precise definition must take
into account the hidden transitions of F and F 0 .
    The environment of an interface automaton F cannot see the hidden transi-
tions of F . Consequently, if F is at a state q, and state r is invisibly reachable
from q (by hidden actions only), then the environment cannot distinguish be-
tween q and r. Given a state q ∈ Q, let ε-closure(q) be the set of states that are
invisibly reachable from q. The environment must be able to accept all output
actions in the set

               obsAO (q) = {a ∈ AO | (∃r ∈ ε-closure(q))(a ∈ AO (r))}

of outputs that may follow after some sequence of hidden transitions from q.
Conversely, the environment can safely issue all input actions in the set

                obsAI (q) = {a ∈ AI | (∀r ∈ ε-closure(q))(a ∈ AI (r))}

of inputs that are accepted after all sequences of hidden transitions from q. For
an implementation state q 0 to refine a specification state q we need to require
that obsAI (q) ⊆ obsAI (q 0 ) and obsAO (q) ⊇ obsAO (q 0 ). Alternating simulation
propagates this requirement from q and q 0 to their successor states.
    To define alternating simulation formally, we use the following notation.
Given a state q ∈ Q and an action a ∈ A of an interface automaton, let
post(q, a) = {r ∈ Q | (q, a, r) ∈ δ} be the set of a-successors of q.

Definition 10. Given two interface automata F and F 0 , a binary relation  ⊆
QF × QF 0 is an alternating simulation by F of F 0 if q  q 0 implies

   (1) for all input actions a ∈ AI (q) and states r ∈ post(q, a), there is a state
    r0 ∈ post(q 0 , a) such that r  r 0 ;
   (2) for all output actions a ∈ AO (q 0 ) and states r 0 ∈ post(q 0 , a), there is a
    state p ∈ ε-closure(q) and a state r ∈ post(p, a) such that r  r 0 ;
   (3) for all hidden actions a ∈ AH (q 0 ) and states r 0 ∈ post(q 0 , a), there is a
    state r ∈ ε-closure(q) such that r  r 0 .

    Conditions (1) and (2) express the input/output duality between states q  q 0
in the alternating simulation relation: every input transition from q must be
matched by an input transition from q 0 , and every output transition from q 0 must
be matched by a sequence of zero or more hidden transitions from q followed
by an output transition. Condition (3) stipulates that every hidden transition
from q 0 can be matched by a sequence of zero or more hidden transitions from q.
In all three cases, matching requires that the alternating-simulation relation
is propagated co-inductively. Since interface automata are input-deterministic,
condition (1) can be rewritten as (1a) AI (q) ⊆ AI (q 0 ) and (1b) for all input
transitions (q, a, r), (q 0 , a, r0 ) ∈ δ I , we have r  r 0 . It can be checked that if q  q 0
for some alternating simulation , then obsAI (q) ⊆ obsAI (q 0 ) and obsAO (q) ⊇
obsAO (q 0 ).
Definition 11. An interface automaton F 0 refines an interface automaton F ,
written F  F 0 , if
  (1) AIF ⊆ AIF 0 and AO      O
                        F ⊇ AF 0 ;
  (2) there is an alternating simulation  by F of F 0 such that qF0  qF0 0 .
    Note that unlike in standard simulation, the “typing” condition (1) is con-
travariant on the input and output action sets. This captures a simple kind of
subclassing: if F  F 0 , then the implementation F 0 is able to provide more ser-
vices than the specification F , but it must be consistent with F on the shared
services. Condition (2) relates the initial states of the two automata.
Example 7. In the example of Figures 1 and 5, there is an alternating simu-
lation that relates q with q 0 for all q ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. Hence OnceOrTwice
refines TryTwice. 2

    It can be shown that refinement relation between interface automata is a
preorder. Refinement can be checked in polynomial time. More precisely, if F
has n1 reachable states and m1 reachable transitions, and F 0 has n2 reachable
states and m2 reachable transitions, then it can be checked in time O((m1 +
m2 ) · (n1 + n2 )) whether F  F 0 [1].
    The following theorem shows that interface automata support independent
implementability: we can always replace an interface automaton F with a more
refined version F 0 such that F  F 0 , provided that F and F 0 are connected to
the environment by the same inputs. The side condition is due to the fact that if
the environment were to provide inputs for F 0 that are not provided for F , then
it would be possible that new incompatibilities arise in the processing of these
inputs. For software components, independent implementability is a statement
of subclass polymorphism: we can always substitute a subclass for a superclass,
provided no new methods of the subclass are used.
Theorem 4. Consider three interface automata F , G, and F 0 such that F and
G are composable and shared (F 0 , G) ⊆ shared (F, G). If F ∼ G and F  F 0 ,
then F 0 ∼ G and F ||G  F 0 ||G.
Proof sketch. The typing conditions are straight-forward to check. Note in par-
ticular that shared (F 0 , G) ⊆ shared (F, G) implies both AH   F 0 ∩ AG = ∅ and
(AIF 0 \AIF ) ∩ AO
                 G = ∅.
    To prove that F 0 ∼ G under the premises of the theorem, we show that
every autonomous path leading from the initial state to an error state of F 0 ⊗ G
can be matched, transition by transition, by an autonomous path leading from
the initial state to an error state of F ⊗ G. The interesting case is that of an
input transition of F 0 in the product F 0 ⊗ G, say on action a. Since the path
is autonomous, the input action a of F 0 must be an output action of G, and
because shared (F 0 , G) ⊆ shared (F, G), the action a must also be an input action
of F . If a is not enabled in F , then we have already hit an error state of F ⊗ G;
otherwise, there are unique a-successors in both F and F 0 , and the path matching
can continue.
    Finally, to prove that F ||G  F 0 ||G under the premises of the theorem,
consider an alternating simulation  by F of F 0 such that qF0  qF0 0 . Then
an alternating simulation 0 by F ||G of F 0 ||G can be defined as follows: let
(p, r) 0 (p0 , r0 ) iff (1) p  p0 , (2) r = r0 , and (3) (p, r) is not an error state
of F ⊗ G. 2
    The property of independent implementability implies that refinement is
compositional: in order to check if F ||G  F 0 ||G0 , it suffices to check both
F  F 0 and G  G0 . This observation allows the decomposition of refine-
ment proofs. Decomposition is particularly important in the case of interface
automata, where the efficiency of refinement checking depends on the number
of states.


5    Discussion
An interface automaton represents both assumptions about the environment,
and guarantees about the specified component. The environment assumptions
are twofold: (1) each output transition incorporates the assumption that the cor-
responding action is accepted by the environment as input; and (2) each input
action that is not accepted at a state encodes the assumption that the envi-
ronment does not provide that input. The component guarantees correspond to
possible sequences and choices of input, output, and hidden actions, as usual.
When two interface automata are composed, the composition operator || com-
bines not only the component guarantees, as is the case in other component
models, but also the environment assumptions.
    Whenever two interface automata F and G are compatible, there is a par-
ticularly simple legal environment, namely, the empty closure close(F, G). This
points to a limitation of interface automata: while the environment assumption
of an automaton can express which inputs may occur, it cannot express which
inputs must occur. Thus, the environment that provides no inputs is always the
best environment for showing compatibility. There are several ways of enriching
interface automata to specify inputs that must occur, among them, synchronic-
ity [3, 6], adding fairness [4], or adding real-time constraints [7]. In these cases,
no generic best environment exists, and a legal environment must be derived as
a winning strategy in a two-player game. Recall that two interfaces F and G are
compatible iff the environment has a strategy to avoid incompatible states of the
product F ⊗ G. In this game, player-1 is the environment, which provides inputs
to the product F ⊗ G, and player-2 is the “team” {F, G} of interfaces, which
choose internal transitions and outputs of F ⊗ G. The game aspect of compati-
bility checking is illustrated by the following example of a stateful, synchronous
extension of assume/guarantee interfaces [3].

Example 8. Suppose that F and G are two generalized A/G interfaces, which
receive inputs and issue outputs in a sequence of rounds and may change, in
each round, their input assumptions and output guarantees. The interface F has
no inputs and the single output variable x; the interface G has the two input
variables x and y, and no outputs. In the first round, the interface F either
goes to state q0 and outputs x = 0, or it goes to state q1 and outputs x 6= 0.
Also in the first round, on input y = 0 the interface G goes to state r0 , and on
input y 6= 0 it goes to state r1 . In the second round, in state q0 the interface F
outputs x = 0, and in state q1 it outputs x 6= 0, after which it goes back to the
initial state. Also the second round, in state r0 the interface G has the input
assumption x = 0, and in state r1 it has the input assumption x 6= 0. After
the second round, also G returns to its initial state and the process repeats ad
infinitum.
    Note that the state q0 of interface F is compatible with the state r0 of
interface G, and q1 is compatible with r1 , but q0 is not compatible with r1 , and q1
is not compatible with r0 . The environment provides the input y to the interface
G in every round. The environment can avoid incompatibilities by copying, in
each (odd) round, the value of x into y. In this way the environment can ensure
that F and G are always in compatible states. Hence the two interfaces F and
G are compatible. The helpful strategy of the environment can be synthesized
as a winning strategy of the two-player game “environment” versus “interfaces.”
In this simple example, it is a game with complete information, because at all
times the environment, by observing the output x of F , can deduce the internal
state of F . 2


     In the presence of hidden transitions, interface languages must be designed
carefully. This is because if the state of an interface is not visible to the envi-
ronment, then a legal environment corresponds to a winning strategy in a game
with partial information. The derivation of such strategies requires, in general,
exponential time, by involving a subset construction that considers all sets of
possible interface states [9]. Any model with an exponential cost for binary com-
position, however, is unlikely to be practical. This is why we have focused, in
this article, on the asynchronous case with hidden transitions, and elsewhere [3,
6, 7], on more general, synchronous and real-time interfaces but without hidden
transitions. Another interesting direction is to investigate stronger but more ef-
ficient compatibility checks, which consider only restricted sets of strategies for
the environment. Such checks would be conservative (i.e., sufficient but not nec-
essary) yet might still achieve the desired properties of incremental design and
independent implementability.
     Rich, stateful interfaces as games have been developed further in [2, 4]. In the
former article, multiple instances of a component, such as a recursive software
module, may be active simultaneously. Compatibility checking for the corre-
sponding interface language is based on solving push-down games. In the latter
article, the notion of error state is generalized to handle resource constraints
of a system: an error occurs if two or more components simultaneously access
or overuse a constrained resource. Critical resources may include power, buffer
capacity, or cost. While the basic set-up of the game “environment” versus “in-
terfaces” remains the same, the objective function of the game changes and may
include quantitative aspects, such as minimizing resource use.
Acknowledgment. We thank Mariëlle Stoelinga for pointing out errors in a
previous version of this article.


References
[1] R. Alur, T.A. Henzinger, O. Kupferman, and M. Vardi. Alternating refinement
    relations. In Proc. Concurrency Theory, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 1466,
    pages 163–178. Springer-Verlag, 1998.
[2] A. Chakrabarti, L. de Alfaro, T.A. Henzinger, M. Jurdziński, and F.Y.C. Mang.
    Interface compatibility checking for software modules. In Proc. Computer-Aided
    Verification, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2404, pages 428–441. Springer-
    Verlag, 2002.
[3] A. Chakrabarti, L. de Alfaro, T.A. Henzinger, and F.Y.C. Mang. Synchronous and
    bidirectional component interfaces. In Proc. Computer-Aided Verification, Lecture
    Notes in Computer Science 2404, pages 414–427. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[4] A. Chakrabarti, L. de Alfaro, T.A. Henzinger, and M. Stoelinga. Resource inter-
    faces. In Proc. Embedded Software, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2855, pages
    117–133. Springer-Verlag, 2003.
[5] L. de Alfaro and T.A. Henzinger. Interface automata. In Proc. Foundations of
    Software Engineering, pages 109–120. ACM Press, 2001.
[6] L. de Alfaro and T.A. Henzinger. Interface theories for component-based design. In
    Proc. Embedded Software, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2211, pages 148–165.
    Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[7] L. de Alfaro, T.A. Henzinger, and M. Stoelinga. Timed interfaces. In Proc. Embed-
    ded Software, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2491, pages 108–122. Springer-
    Verlag, 2002.
[8] N.A. Lynch. Distributed Algorithms. Morgan-Kaufmann, 1996.
[9] J. Reif. The complexity of two-player games of incomplete information. J. Com-
    puter and System Sciences, 29:274–301, 1984.
