                         Kent Academic Repository

Lamela Seijas, Pablo, Nemish, Alexander, Smith, David and Thompson,
Simon (2020) Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts
on Blockchain. In: Bernhard, Matthew and Bracciali, Andrea and Camp,
L. Jean and Matsuo, Shin'ichiro and Maurushat, Alana and Rønne, Peter
B. and Sala, Massimiliano, eds. Financial Cryptography and Data Security.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Springer, Cham, Switzerland, pp.
496-511. ISBN 978-3-030-54454-6.

Downloaded from
https://kar.kent.ac.uk/82483/ The University of Kent's Academic Repository KAR


The version of record is available from
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54455-3_35

This document version
Publisher pdf

DOI for this version


Licence for this version
CC BY (Attribution)

Additional information



Versions of research works

Versions of Record
If this version is the version of record, it is the same as the published version available on the publisher's web site.
Cite as the published version.

Author Accepted Manuscripts
If this document is identified as the Author Accepted Manuscript it is the version after peer review but before type
setting, copy editing or publisher branding. Cite as Surname, Initial. (Year) 'Title of article'. To be published in Title
of Journal , Volume and issue numbers [peer-reviewed accepted version]. Available at: DOI or URL (Accessed: date).

Enquiries
If you have questions about this document contact ResearchSupport@kent.ac.uk. Please include the URL of the record
in KAR. If you believe that your, or a third party's rights have been compromised through this document please see
our Take Down policy (available from https://www.kent.ac.uk/guides/kar-the-kent-academic-repository#policies).
          Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing
           Financial Contracts on Blockchain

          Pablo Lamela Seijas1(B) , Alexander Nemish3 , David Smith1 ,
                           and Simon Thompson1,2
                            1
                              IOHK, Hong Kong, China
                     {pablo.lamela,simon.thompson}@iohk.io,
                              david.smith@tweag.io
             2
               School of Computing, University of Kent, Canterbury, UK
                             s.j.thompson@kent.ac.uk
                              3
                                IOHK, Kyiv, Ukraine
                            alexander.nemish@iohk.io


       Abstract. Marlowe is a DSL for ﬁnancial contracts. We describe the
       implementation of Marlowe on the Cardano blockchain, and the Mar-
       lowe Playground web-based development and simulation environment.
          Contracts in Marlowe can be exhaustively analysed prior to run-
       ning them, thus providing strong guarantees to participants in the con-
       tract. The Marlowe system itself has been formally veriﬁed using the
       Isabelle theorem prover, establishing such properties as the conservation
       of money.


       Keywords: Cardano · DSL · Functional · Haskell · SMT · Static
       analysis


1    Introduction
Marlowe [11] is a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) for implementing ﬁnancial con-
tracts on blockchain: our initial target is Cardano, but it could be implemented
on many distributed ledgers (DLT platforms), including Ethereum. Marlowe is
embedded in Haskell, allowing users selectively to use aspects of Haskell – typ-
ically deﬁnitions of constants and simple functions – to express contracts more
readably and succinctly. Section 2 gives an overview of the language, and the
changes made to it since it was originally introduced in [9].
    Marlowe is speciﬁed by a reference semantics for the language written in
Haskell, and we can use that in a number of ways. We can interpret Marlowe
contracts in Haskell itself, but we can also use that implementation, compiled into
Plutus [6], to interpret Marlowe directly on the Cardano blockchain, see Sect. 3.
We can also execute the semantics – translated into PureScript – directly in a
browser, to give an interactive simulation environment, see Sect. 6.
    Because Marlowe is a DSL, we are able to build special purpose tools and
techniques to support it. Crucially in a ﬁnancial environment, we are able to
exhaustively analyse contracts without executing them, so that we can, for
 The Author(s) 2020
 c
M. Bernhard et al. (Eds.): FC 2020 Workshops, LNCS 12063, pp. 496–511, 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-54455-3_35
    Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain       497

instance, check whether any particular contract is able to make all the payments
it should: in the case it is not, we get an explicit example of how it can fail.
This analysis (Sect. 4) is built into the Marlowe Playground. Finally (Sect. 5) we
are able to use formal veriﬁcation to prove properties of the implementation of
Marlowe, including a guarantee that “money in = money out” for all contracts.
    Building on [9], the speciﬁc contributions of this paper are threefold. We
describe revised versions of Marlowe and its Playground, we describe the imple-
mentation of Marlowe on the Cardano blockchain, and we present both auto-
mated static analysis and machine-supported veriﬁcation for Marlowe.


2    Marlowe Revised: Version 3.0
Since ﬁrst publication, we have revised the language design: this section gives a
brief overview of the current (3.0) version of the language and its semantics.


The Marlowe Model. Contracts are built by putting together a small number
of constructs that in combination can describe many diﬀerent ﬁnancial contracts.
    The parties to the contract, also called the participants, can engage in various
actions: they can be asked to deposit money, or to make a choice between various
alternatives. In some cases, any party will be able to trigger the contract just to
notify it that some condition has become true (e.g., a timeout has occurred).
    The Marlowe model allows for a contract to control money in a number of
disjoint accounts: this allows for more explicit control of how the money ﬂows
in the contract. Each account is owned by a particular party to the contract,
and that party receives a refund of any remaining funds in the account when the
contract is closed.
    Marlowe contracts describe a series of steps, typically by describing the ﬁrst
step, together with another (sub-) contract that describes what to do next. For
example, the contract Pay a p v cont says “make a payment of v Lovelace to
the party p from the account a, and then follow the contract cont”. We call cont
the continuation of the contract.
    In executing a contract, we need to keep track of the current contract: after
making a step in the example above, the current contract would be cont. We also
have to keep track of some other information, such as how much is held in each
account: this information together is the state, which generally changes at each
step. A step can also see an action taking place, such as money being deposited,
or an eﬀect being produced, e.g. a payment. It is through their wallets that users
are able to interact with Marlowe contracts running on the blockchain, making
deposits and receiving payments.


Marlowe Step by Step. Marlowe has ﬁve ways of building contracts, we call
these contract constructs. Contract constructs, in turn, can also contain values,
observations and actions.
498    P. Lamela Seijas et al.

Values, observations and actions are used to supply external information and
inputs to a running contract to control how it will evolve.
   Values include some quantities that change with time, like the current slot
number, the current balance of an account, and any choices that have already
been made. Values can be combined using addition, subtraction and negation.
   Observations are Boolean expressions that compare values, and can be com-
bined using the standard Boolean operators. It is also possible to observe whether
any choice has been made (for a particular identiﬁed choice). Observations will
have a value at every step of execution.
   Actions happen at particular points during execution and can be (i) deposit-
ing money, (ii) making a choice between various alternatives, or (iii) notifying
the contract that a certain observation has become true.

Contract constructs are the main building block of contracts, and there are ﬁve
of them: four of these – Pay, Let, If and When – build a complex contract from
simpler contracts, and the ﬁfth, Close, is a simple contract. At each step of
execution we will obtain a new state and continuation contract and, in some it
is possible that eﬀects, like payments and warnings, can be generated too.
    Pay: A payment contract Pay a p v cont will make a payment of value v
from the account a to a payee p, which will be one of the contract participants
or another account in the contract. Warnings will be generated if the value v is
not positive, or if there is not enough in the account to make the payment in full.
In the ﬁrst case, nothing will be transferred; in the later case, a partial payment
(of all the money available) is made. The contract will continue as cont.
    Close: A contract Close provides for the contract to be closed (or termi-
nated). The only action that is performed is to refund the contents of each
account to their respective owners. This is performed one account per step, but
all accounts will be refunded in a single transaction. All contracts eventually
reduce to Close.
    If: The conditional If obs cont1 cont2 will continue as cont1 or cont2,
depending on the Boolean value of the observation obs on execution.
    When: This is the most complex constructor for contracts, with the form
When cases timeout cont. It is a contract that is triggered on actions, which
may or may not happen at any particular slot: the permitted actions and their
consequences are described by cases.
    The list cases contains a collection of cases of the form Case ac co, where
ac is an action and co a continuation (another contract). When the action ac
is performed, the state is updated accordingly and the contract will continue as
described by co.
    In order to make sure that the contract makes progress eventually, the con-
tract When cases timeout cont will continue as cont as soon as any valid
transaction is issued after the timeout (a slot number) is reached.
    Let: A let contract Let id val cont causes the expression val to be eval-
uated, and stored with the name id. The contract then continues as cont.
      Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain     499

3      Implementation of Marlowe on Cardano
Marlowe is speciﬁed by an executable semantics written in Haskell, but to make
it usable in practice with ﬁnancial contracts, it needs to be implemented on a
blockchain. In this section, we explain how Marlowe is executed on the Cardano
blockchain using an interpreter1 written in the Plutus programming language.


3.1     Cardano and Plutus

Cardano is a third-generation blockchain that solves the energy usage issue by
moving to an energy eﬃcient Proof of Stake protocol [2].
    Cardano aims to support smart contracts during its Shelley release in 2020.
Cardano smart contract platform is called Plutus, and it uses Haskell program-
ming language to generate a form of SystemFω , called Plutus Core, by extending
GHC using its plugin support [8, Section 13.3].
    To implement Marlowe contracts, we use the PlutusTx compiler, which com-
piles Haskell code into serialized Plutus Core code, to create a Cardano validator
script that ensures the correct execution of the contract. This form of implemen-
tation relies on the extensions to the UTxO model described in [6].


3.2     Extended UTxO

Cardano is a UTxO-based (unspent transaction output) blockchain, similar to
Bitcoin [5]. It extends the Bitcoin model by allowing transaction outputs to
hold a Datum. As the name suggests, this is a serialised data value used to
store and communicate a contract state. This allows us to create complex multi-
transactional contracts. In a nutshell, the EUTxO model looks like this:




where black circles represent unspent transaction outputs, and red lines show
transaction inputs that reference existing transaction outputs. Each transaction
output contains a Value, and is protected either by a public key, or by a Validator.

1
    The implementation is available at https://github.com/input-output-hk/plutus/
    blob/0ca9af4f6614d591de7ebbe4dd759ce122d74efd/marlowe/src/Language/Marlo
    we/Semantics.hs.
500    P. Lamela Seijas et al.

   In order to spend an existing transaction output protected by a Validator,
one must create a transaction (a Context) that has an input that references
the transaction output, and contains a Redeemer, such that Validator(Datum,
Redeemer, Context) evaluates to T rue. A valid signature is required to spend
a public key transaction output.

3.3   Design Space
There are several ways to implement Marlowe contracts on top of Plutus. We
could write a Marlowe to Plutus compiler that would convert each Marlowe
contract into a speciﬁc Plutus script. Instead, we chose to implement a Marlowe
interpreter as a single Plutus script. This approach has a number of advantages:
– It is simple: having a single Plutus script that implements all Marlowe con-
  tracts makes it easier to implement, review, and test what we have done.
– Implementation is close to the semantics of Marlowe, as sketched above and
  in more detail in [9], which makes it easier to validate.
– The same implementation can be used for both on- and oﬀ-chain (wallet)
  execution of Marlowe code.
– It facilitates client-side contract evaluation, where we reuse the same code
  to do contract execution emulation in an IDE, and compile it to WASM/-
  JavaScript on the client side, e.g. in the Marlowe Playground.
– Having a single interpreter for all (or a particular group of) Marlowe contracts
  allows us to monitor the blockchain for these contracts, if required.
– Finally, Cardano nodes could potentially use an optimised interpreter
  (e.g: native) just for Marlowe contracts, which would save processing time.
Marlowe contract execution on the blockchain consists of a chain of transactions
where, at each stage, the remaining contract and its state are passed through
the Datum, and actions/inputs (i.e. choices and money deposits) are passed via
the Redeemer. Each step in contract execution is a transaction that spends a
Marlowe contract transaction output by providing a valid input as Redeemer,
and produces a transaction output with a the remaining Marlowe contract and
the updated state.
   We store the remaining contract in the Datum, which makes it visible to
everyone. This simpliﬁes contract reﬂection and retrospection.

3.4   Contract Lifecycle on the Extended UTxO Model
As described above, the Marlowe interpreter is realised as a Validation script.
We can divide the execution of a Marlowe Contract into two phases: creation
and execution.

Creation. Contract creation is realised as a transaction with at least one script
output, with the particular Marlowe contract in the Datum, and protected by
the Marlowe validator script. Note that we do not place any restriction on the
transaction inputs, which could use any other transaction outputs, including
other scripts. This gives this model optimal ﬂexibility and composability.
     Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain           501

data MarloweData = MarloweData {
    marloweState    :: State,
    marloweContract :: Contract }

The contract has a state

data State = State { accounts    :: Map AccountId Ada
                   , choices     :: Map ChoiceId ChosenNum
                   , boundValues :: Map ValueId Integer
                   , minSlot     :: Slot }

where accounts maps account ids to their balances, choices stores user made
choice values, boundValues stores evaluated Value’s introduced by Let expres-
sions, and minSlot holds a minimal slot number that a contract has seen, to
avoid ‘time travel to the past’.

Execution. Marlowe contract execution consists of a chain of transactions, where
the remaining contract and state are passed through the Datum, and input
actions (i.e. choices) are passed as redeemer scripts.
    Each execution step is a transaction that spends a Marlowe contract transac-
tion output by providing an expected input in a redeemer script, and produces
a transaction output with a Marlowe contract as continuation.
    The Marlowe interpreter ﬁrst validates the current contract state: i.e. we
check that the contract locks at least as much as speciﬁed by the contract bal-
ances (the accounts ﬁeld in State), and that balances are strictly positive.2
    We then apply computeTransaction to the contract inputs, the contract
continuation, and new state to compute the expected transaction outcomes:
computeTransaction ::
  TransactionInput -> State -> Contract -> TransactionOutput
where a TransactionInput consists of the current slot interval, together with
other ontract inputs, and the outputs combine any payments and warnings with
the resulting output state and contract.
    Given a list of Input’s from Redeemer, the interpreter reduces a contract
until it becomes quiescent: either it evaluates to Close, or it expects a user
input in a When construct. All Pay, If, Let, Close constructs are evaluated
immediately.
    The evaluation function returns a new contract state, contract continuation,
a list of warnings (such as partial payments), and a list of expected payments
(i.e. one for each of the Pay constructs evaluated).
    The on-chain Validator code cannot generate transaction outputs, but can
only validate whatever a user provides in a transaction. Consider this simple
zero coupon bond example.
2
    Using the Isabelle proof assistant, we have formally veriﬁed that given a state with
    positive balances, it is impossible for any possible contract and inputs to result in
    non-positive balances. This is described in more detail in Sect. 5.2.
502    P. Lamela Seijas et al.

When [ Case (Deposit aliceAccount alicePubKey (Constant 850_000_000))
    (Pay aliceAccount (Party bobPubKey) (Constant 850_000_000)
        (When
            [ Case
                (Deposit aliceAccount bobPubKey (Constant 1000_000_000))
                Close
            ] (Slot 200) Close
        ))] (Slot 100) Close

Here we expect Alice to deposit 850 Ada (850,000,000 Lovelace) into her account
aliceAccount before slot 100. Otherwise, we Close the contract.
   If Alice deposits the money before slot 100, money immediately goes to Bob,
by requiring a transaction output of 850 Ada to Bob’s public key address. Alice
must produce the following Redeemer to satisfy the Marlowe validator:
[IDeposit aliceAccount alicePubKey 850000000]
Bob is then expected to deposit 1000 Ada into Alice’s account before slot 200.
If he does, the contract is closed, and all remaining balances must be paid out
to their respective owners; in this case, 1000 Ada must be paid to Alice. If Bob
does not pay, then Alice has lost her money, because this is an unsecured loan.




   Note, that it is possible to provide multiple inputs at a time, allowing as many
steps of a contract execution as necessary to be merged. This gives atomicity to
some operations, and saves on transaction fees.

Ensuring Execution Validity. Except for the transaction that closes a Marlowe
contract, the Marlowe validator script checks that a spending transaction con-
tains a valid continuation output, i.e: the hash of the output validator is the
same (same hash), and the new state and contract are the expected ones: the
ones resulting from applying the computeTransaction to the given inputs.

Closing a Contract. When a contract evaluates to Close, all remaining balances
the accounts of the contract are payed out to the respective owners of each
account, and the contract is removed from the set of unspent transaction outputs.
      Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain     503

Future Work. Cardano extends its ledger rules to support forging of custom
currencies and tokens. Simple token creation gives interesting possibilities of
representing Marlowe contract parties by tokens. This tokenization of contract
participants abstracts away concrete public keys into contract roles. In turn,
those roles could be traded independently of a contract. We are working on
adding multicurrency or roles support to Marlowe.


4      Static Analysis of Contracts
Marlowe semantics use types to prevent many non-sensical contracts from being
written. But there are potential problems which are harder to detect until run-
time, for example, whether there will be enough money to issue all the payments
declared in the contract. At that point, it may already be too late to ﬁx them,
particularly in the case of blockchain.
    Fortunately, in the case of Marlowe, a computer can decidedly determine
whether a particular contract satisﬁes certain property before executing it, and
it can provide a counter-example when it does not.
    Our implementation relies on the Haskell library SBV, which in turn relies
on existing SMT solvers to check satisﬁability of properties.

4.1     SBV Library
SBV [7] (SMT Based Veriﬁcation) library provides a high-level API that allows
developers to automatically prove properties about Haskell programs, among
other functionalities. The SBV library translates these properties to SMTLib
queries, passes them to one or several SMT solvers, and translates the results
back to the format in which the queries were written.

SBV monad. SBV provides a monad called SBV, a function can use parameters
wrapped in this monad to represent symbolic values. Functions that take sym-
bolic values can be used as properties and passed to the solver, which will replace
the symbolic values with concrete values that satisfy or falsify the property.

4.2     Using SBV to Analyse Marlowe Contracts
Marlowe semantics represents errors that can be found at runtime as Warnings.
     The property that we have implemented using SBV library can be enunciated
as: “the given contract will not need to issue warnings at runtime no matter the
inputs it receives”.
     This property is essentially a symbolic version of the semantics that returns a
list of the warnings produced by a symbolic trace (a symbolic list of transactions
input to the contract):

warningsTraceWB :: Bounds -> SSlotNumber -> SList NTransaction
                -> Contract -> SList NTransactionWarning
504    P. Lamela Seijas et al.

where types that begin with S, like SSlotNumber, are abbreviations for the sym-
bolic versions of types: in this case SBV SlotNumber. The types that begin with
N are nested types, which we explain in the Custom datatypes section below.

Custom Datatypes. SBV does not currently seem to support in general the
use of custom datatypes. Fortunately, SBV supports tuples and the Either type.
We can represent all types that Marlowe requires as combinations of Either and
tuples, with the exception of the Contract type, but we do not need a symbolic
version of the Contract type because we know its value at the time of analysis.
For example, the TransactionResult type:
data TransactionResult
 = TransactionProcessed [TransactionWarning]
                        [TransactionEffect]
                        State
 | TransactionError TransactionError
becomes the nested type synonym NTransactionResult:

type NTransactionResult =
  Either ([NTransactionWarning], [NTransactionEffect], NState)
         NTransactionError

Because working with nested types is much more error prone than working with
the original data-types, we used Template Haskell [15] to implement functions
that transform the custom datatypes into nested types and generate the appro-
priate conversion functions.

Bounds for the State and the Inputs. The recursion in the execution of
the semantics is bounded by the Contract, and because the Contract is not a
symbolic parameter, the translation will terminate.
    However, in both the input and the State record there are several lists (rep-
resenting ﬁnite maps) that are not explicitly bounded in the implementation.
Some parts of the semantics are bounded by the length of these lists (or maps),
such as the implementation of Close. In order for the symbolic implementation
to be ﬁnite, we need to ﬁnd a bound for the length of these lists or maps.
    Fortunately, we can infer a bound for all this lists quite straightforwardly.
The least obvious one is the length of the list of transactions; we discuss the
proof for this bound in Sect. 5.4.

Returning Non-Symbolic Contract Values. Values that rely on symbolic
values have to be themselves symbolic, and the continuation Contract after each
step depends on the Inputs and State, which are both symbolic. But having
the contract as a symbolic parameter would be inconvenient since it is recursive,
we know it in advance, and we use it to bound the execution of the symbolic
semantics.
      Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain   505

   We work around this problem by modifying the signature of the function to
receive a continuation function instead, and instead of just returning a value,
we return the result of applying the continuation function to the result we were
planning to return.
   For example, the original type signature for the apply function was:
apply :: Environment -> State -> Input -> Contract -> ApplyResult
and the symbolic version of the apply function has the following signature:
apply :: SymVal a => Bounds
      -> SEnvironment -> SState -> SInput -> Contract
      -> (SApplyResult -> DetApplyResult -> SBV a) -> SBV a
where DetApplyResult contains the parts of ApplyResult that are not symbolic
(like the Contract).

5      Formal Verification of the Marlowe Semantics
We can also use proof assistants to demonstrate that the Marlowe semantics
presents certain desirable properties, such as that money is preserved and any-
thing unspent is returned to users by the end of the execution of any contract.
Formal statements and proofs of these properties are given in [11].
    Currently, we have translated the Haskell Marlowe semantics to Isabelle while
keeping both versions as close as possible, but we decided to make them diﬀerent
in two main aspects:
– We use integers for identifiers because they are easier to handle than strings.
– We use a custom implementation of maps and sets that use lists because
  Isabelle already provides many theorems that are proved for lists.

5.1     Termination Proof
Isabelle automatically proves termination for most function. This is not the
case for reductionLoop. This function repeatedly calls reduceContractStep
until it returns NotReduced, so proving overall termination requires a proof that
reduceContractStep will eventually do that. In order to prove this, we deﬁned
a measure for the size of a pair of Contract and State:
fun evalBound :: "State ⇒ Contract ⇒ nat" where
"evalBound sta cont = length (accounts sta) + 2 * (size cont)"
where size is a measure already generated automatically by Isabelle.
   We need the number of accounts in the State because the size of the contract
Close will not decrease when calling reduceContractStep, but the number of
accounts will, unless they are all empty.
   And we needed to multiply the size of the Contract by two because the
primitive Deposit may increase the number of accounts by one, so we need
to multiply the eﬀect of the reduction of the size of the contract in order to
compensate that.
506    P. Lamela Seijas et al.

5.2   Valid State and Positive Account Preservation

There are some values for State that are allowed by its type but make no sense,
especially in the case of Isabelle semantics where we use lists instead of maps:

1. The lists represent maps, so they should have no repeated keys.
2. We want two maps that are equal to be represented the same, so we force
   keys to be in ascending order.
3. We only want to record those accounts that contain a positive amount.

We call a value for State valid if the ﬁrst two properties are true. And we say
it has positive accounts if the third property is true.
    We have proved that functions in the semantics preserve all three properties.


Quiescent Result. A contract is quiescent if and only if the root construct
When, or if the contract is Close and all accounts are empty. We have proved
that, if an input State is valid and accounts are positive, then the output will
be quiescent.


5.3   Money Preservation and Contract Timeout

One of the dangers of using smart contracts is that a badly written one can
potentially lock its funds forever. By the end of the contract, all the money
paid to the contract must be distributed back, in some way, to a subset of the
participants of the contract. To ensure this is the case we proved two properties:


Money Preservation. Money is not created or destroyed by the semantics.
More speciﬁcally, the money that comes in plus the money in the contract before
the transaction must be equal to the money that comes out plus the contract
after the transaction, except in the case of an error.


Timeout Closes a Contract. For every Marlowe Contract there is a slot num-
ber after which an empty transaction can be issued that will close the contract
and refund all the money in its accounts.
   A conservative upper bound for the expiration slot number can be calculated
eﬃciently by using the function maxTime (or maxTimeContract in the Isabelle
semantics), essentially by taking the maximum of all the timeouts in the contract.
   We proved that this conservative upper bound is general enough for every
contract, by showing that, if the contract is not closed and empty, then an empty
transaction sent after maxTime will close the contract and empty the accounts.
      Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain      507

5.4     Bound on the Maximum Number of Transactions
Another property of Marlowe is that any given Contract has an implicit ﬁnite
bound on the maximum number of Transactions that it accepts. This is a
convenient property for two reasons.
   First, it reduces the danger of Denial of Service (DoS) attacks, because the
number of valid inputs is limited, an attacker participant cannot arbitrarily
block the contract by issuing an unbounded amount of useless Transactions.
Secondly, the number of transactions bounds the length of traces that symbolic
execution (see Sect. 4) needs to explore. We state the property as follows:
lemma playTrace_only_accepts_maxTransactionsInitialState :
"playTrace sl c l = TransactionOutput txOut
  =⇒ length l ≤ maxTransactionsInitialState c"
where maxTransactionsInitialState is essentially the maximum number of
nested When constructs in the contract plus one.
   This property implies that any trace that is longer than this is guaranteed
to produce at least one error. Because transactions that produce an error do
not alter the state of the contract, such a list of transactions (a trace) will be
equivalent to a list of transactions that does not have the erroneous transaction.
Thus, we do not lose generality by only exploring shorter traces.

5.5     Future Work
At the time of writing, we are actively trying new optimisations and approaches
for implementing static analysis that are more eﬃcient in practise than the
approach described in this paper. As a consequence, in some cases, the static
analysis implementation can deviate considerably from the Haskell semantics.
Our intention is to keep using property-based testing and formal veriﬁcation to
ensure that both implementations are consistent.

6      The Marlowe Playground
For Marlowe to be usable in practice, users need to be able to design and
develop Marlowe contracts, and also to understand how contracts will behave
once deployed to the blockchain, but without actually deploying them.
   The Marlowe Playground, a web-based tool that supports the interactive
construction, revision, and simulation of smart contracts written in Marlowe,
provides these facilities, as well as access to a static analysis of contracts (as
described in the previous section), an online tutorial for Marlowe and a set
of example contracts. The playground is available at https://prod.meadow.
marlowe.iohkdev.io/.3
   At the top level, the playground oﬀers three panes: the main Simulation
pane, as well as panes for developing Marlowe contracts, embedded in Haskell
or using the Blockly visual language.
3
    Development of the playground is rapid, and the latest, unstable, version is also
    available at https://alpha.marlowe.iohkdev.io/.
508     P. Lamela Seijas et al.

Development. On the simulation pane, “pure” Marlowe contacts can be developed
directly, not embedded in another language. Two reasons for doing this are:

– There is a shallower learning curve for users who are new to Haskell or pro-
  gramming languages in general. The Marlowe constructs are quite simple,
  and there is no need, at least initially, to learn about Haskell syntax or even
  variables, functions etc.
– As we step through the execution of a contract in a simulation, the contract is
  reduced; it is very useful to be able to view, or even edit, the reduced contract
  during this execution.

As contracts become larger it makes sense to use another editor in the Haskell
pane. Here contracts can be written using facilities from Haskell to abbreviate
and make more readable the description of the contracts. These contracts can
then be transferred as a pure Marlowe data structure into the simulation pane.
    Contracts can also be written using Google’s Blockly visual programming
language, as was earlier described in Meadow [9]. Blockly gives an easy way to
introduce the concepts of Marlowe to users who have no programming knowledge,
and in particular the editor gives users a set of options for each construct as the
contract is built. Once a contract has been constructed in Blockly it is possible
to transfer that contract to the simulation pane. It is also possible to transfer a
Marlowe contract to Blockly for further editing.
                           The Marlowe editor in the unstable version of the play-
                       ground has a feature called holes to aid writing contracts.
                       If we enter the contract ?mycontract we will be presented
                       with a dropdown list of values that could be used.
                           In our case ?mycontract must be a Contract of some
                       sort, and so we are oﬀered a choice of Contract construc-
                       tors from a dropdown list. If we choose Pay then the Mar-
                       lowe editor will automatically ﬁll in a skeleton Pay con-
                       tract with new holes where we need to provide values.

      Pay ?accountId_1_1 ?payee_1_2 ?value_1_3 ?contract_1_4
New options will be presented, one for each hole, and each will have a dropdown
list of all the possible values.
                         A complete contract can be written in this guided way with
                     the user needing only to ﬁll in strings and numbers by hand.
                     This approach to writing holes in your code and “asking” the
                     compiler what you could put in there is easy to implement
                     in a DSL because there are very limited options, however is
                     also becoming popular with more complex languages such as
Haskell and Idris.
    Users can at any point save the current contract directly to a Github Gist, as
well as being able to re-load contracts from Github Gists. There are also some
demo contracts that can be loaded in their Haskell and Marlowe versions.
    Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain       509

Simulation. Contracts written in the Marlowe editor are parsed in real-time and
if there are no errors (and no holes) then the contract is analysed to discover
which actions a user could take to progress the contract. These actions are dis-
played in the “Input Composer” above the editor. Consider the following example
contract:

     When [Case (Deposit (AccountId 0 "investor")
                "guarantor" (Constant 1000_000000)) Close] 10 Close

In this case, the only action a user can take to progress the contract is to accept
a deposit of 1000 ADA from the guarantor to the investor’s account. Because of
this, the playground can display this action in the input composer.
                                                The user can then choose to add
                                            this action to a transaction being pre-
                                            pared. Once the action is added other
                                            inputs become possible; these are dis-
played in the input composer, and again they can be added to the transaction
being composed. In this way, multiple actions can be added to a transaction
before it is applied.
                                                A user can then apply this trans-
                                            action and in the example above this
                                            would result in the state pane show-
                                            ing a single payment and in addition
                                            the contract in the Marlowe editor will
have been reduced to Close.
    At any point in the simulation, the user can undo any steps made: in this
particular case, they can undo the application of the transaction, and iteratively
undo more steps. At any point, they can also reset the contract to its initial
state. This enables users to apply transactions, see their eﬀects, step back, and
try diﬀerent transactions to see the eﬀects of the changes on the result. They
can also change the reduced contract to investigate variants of the original.
    The ﬁnal feature that we would like to present is the static analysis of con-
tracts. As described in the previous section, it is possible to carry out a symbolic
execution of a contract and then use a SMT solver to look for cases that could
cause unwanted situations. The playground uses this to search for situations
where contract execution would cause warnings. For example, suppose you write
a contract that causes a payment of 450 Lovelace from Alice to Bob but the con-
tract allows a situation where Alice has only deposited 350 Lovelace. The static
analysis will ﬁnd this partial payment case and report it to the playground user
with an example of how it could occur.


7    Related Work

Our work is inspired by the work of Peyton Jones et al. [14] to describe ﬁnancial
contracts using a DSL embedded in Haskell. In the remainder of this section we
510     P. Lamela Seijas et al.

look at a number of recent systems that bear direct comparison with Marlowe;
an earlier paper [10] gives a detailed review of smart contracts on blockchain.
    The Findel project [4] examines ﬁnancial contracts on the Ethereum plat-
form, and is also based on [14]. The authors note that payments need to be
bounded; this is made concrete in our account by our notion of commitments.
They take no account of commitments or timeouts as our approach does, and so
are unable to guarantee some properties – such as a ﬁnite lifetime – built into
Marlowe by design. Nxt [12], is special-purpose in providing a “fat” high-level
API, containing built-in transaction types and transactions that support some
250 primitives; these can be “scripted” in a client using a binding to the API,
which is available, e.g., in JavaScript. In providing such speciﬁcity this bears
comparison with our implementation of contracts from the ACTUS standard [1].
    BitML [3] is a DSL for specifying Marlowe-like contracts that regulate trans-
fers on the Bitcoin blockchain, and is implemented via a compiler that translates
contracts into Bitcoin transactions plus strategies. Participants execute a con-
tract by appending these transactions on the Bitcoin blockchain, according to
their strategies, which involve the exchange of bitstrings that guarantee to a
very high probability the correctness of contract execution. Marlowe is directly
implemented by an interpreter which could also be implemented on a covenant-
based [13] extension of the Bitcoin blockchain.


8     Conclusions and Future Work
Rather than aiming to be general-purpose, Marlowe is a DSL designed to support
ﬁnancial contracts on blockchain. We leverage its speciﬁcity in our work on
static analysis and veriﬁcation, where we are able to deliver much greater impact
and focus than we could for a general-purpose language. We are able to shape
the development and simulation environment to give stronger user support too.
Moreover, Marlowe presents a model for how other DSLs can be built in this
space, supporting diﬀerent domains such as provenance in the supply chain.
    Deﬁning the language by means of an executable reference semantics means
that we can, as well as directly executing this semantics, generate an on-chain
interpreter for it and simulate it in browser using the Haskell-like languages
Plutus and PureScript. This is particularly straightforward when working with
a subset of Haskell that is represented in the same way on these languages.
    Our medium term aim is launching on Cardano blockchain itself, by which
time we expect to have added multiple currencies to Marlowe, as well as making
(roles in) Marlowe contracts tradeable, through tokenising contract roles.


References
 1. ACTUS. https://www.actusfrf.org. Accessed 9 Dec 2019
 2. Badertscher, C., et al.: Ouroboros genesis: composable proof-of-stake blockchains
    with dynamic availability. In: CCS 2018 (2018)
   Marlowe: Implementing and Analysing Financial Contracts on Blockchain            511

 3. Bartoletti, M., Zunino, R.: BitML: a calculus for bitcoin smart contracts. In: CCS
    2018. ACM (2018)
 4. Biryukov, A., Khovratovich, D., Tikhomirov, S.: Findel: secure derivative contracts
    for Ethereum. In: Brenner, M., et al. (eds.) FC 2017. LNCS, vol. 10323, pp. 453–
    467. Springer, Cham (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70278-0_28
 5. Bonneau, J., et al.: SoK: research perspectives and challenges for bitcoin and cryp-
    tocurrencies. In: IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE (2015)
 6. Chakravarty, M., et al.: Functional blockchain contracts (2019). https://iohk.io/
    en/research/library/papers/functional-blockchain-contracts/
 7. Erkök, L.: SBV: SMT based veriﬁcation in Haskell (2010). http://leventerkok.
    github.io/sbv/. Accessed 3 Dec 2019
 8. GHC: User’s Guide (2019). https://downloads.haskell.org/~ghc/8.6.3/docs/html/
    users_guide/index.html. Accessed 20 Feb 2019
 9. Lamela Seijas, P., Thompson, S.: Marlowe: ﬁnancial contracts on blockchain. In:
    Margaria, T., Steﬀen, B. (eds.) ISoLA 2018. LNCS, vol. 11247, pp. 356–375.
    Springer, Cham (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-03427-6_27
10. Lamela Seijas, P., Thompson, S., McAdams, D.: Scripting smart contracts for dis-
    tributed ledger technology. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/1156 (2016).
    https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1156
11. Marlowe github (2018). https://github.com/input-output-hk/marlowe. Accessed
    27 Jan 2020
12. Nxt (2013). https://nxtplatform.org/. Accessed 26 Mar 2018
13. O’Connor, R., Piekarska, M.: Enhancing bitcoin transactions with covenants. In:
    Brenner, M., et al. (eds.) FC 2017. LNCS, vol. 10323, pp. 191–198. Springer, Cham
    (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-70278-0_12
14. Peyton Jones, S., et al.: Composing contracts: an adventure in ﬁnancial engineering
    (functional pearl). In: Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGPLAN ICFP. ACM (2000)
15. Sheard, T., Peyton Jones, S.: Template meta-programming for Haskell. In: Pro-
    ceedings of the 2002 Haskell Workshop, Pittsburgh. ACM SIGPLAN (2002)


Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium
or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were
made.
     The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and
your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
