                             How to write a nan ial
                                            ontra t
                   S.L. Peyton Jones and J-M. Eber




This hapter is based losely on \Composing ontra ts: an adventure in nan ial
engineering", Pro eedings International Conferen e on Fun tional Programming,
Montreal, 2000, with permission from ACM, New York.

1 Introdu tion
The nan e and insuran e industry manipulates in reasingly omplex ontra ts.
Here is an example: the ontra t gives the holder the right to hoose on 30 June
2000 between
D1 Both of:
    D11 Re eive $100 on 29 Jan 2001.
    D12 Pay $105 on 1 Feb 2002.
D2 An option exer isable on 15 De 2000 to hoose one of:
    D21 Both of:
         D211 Re eive $100 on 29 Jan 2001.
         D212 Pay $106 on 1 Feb 2002.
    D22 Both of:
         D221 Re eive $100 on 29 Jan 2001.
         D222 Pay $112 on 1 Feb 2003.
The details of this ontra t | all it C | are not important, but it is a simpli ed
but realisti example of the sort of ontra t that is traded in nan ial derivative
markets. What is important is that omplex ontra ts, su h as C , are formed by
 ombining together simpler ontra ts, su h as D1, whi h in turn are formed from
simpler ontra ts still, su h as D11, D12.
    At this point, any red-blooded fun tional programmer should start to foam at
the mouth, yelling \build a ombinator library". And indeed, that turns out to be
not only possible, but tremendously bene ial.
    The nan e industry has an enormous vo abulary of jargon for typi al om-
binations of nan ial ontra ts (swaps, futures, aps, oors, swaptions, spreads,
2                                                      How to write a nan ial ontra t

straddles, aptions, European options, Ameri an options, ...the list goes on). Treat-
ing ea h of these individually is like having a large atalogue of prefabri ated om-
ponents. The trouble is that someone will soon want a ontra t that is not in the
 atalogue.
     If, instead, we ould de ne ea h of these ontra ts using a xed, pre isely-
spe i ed set of ombinators, we would be in a mu h better position than having a
  xed atalogue. For a start, it be omes mu h easier to des ribe new, unforeseen,
 ontra ts. Beyond that, we an systemati ally analyse, manipulate and perform
 omputations over these new ontra ts, be ause they are des ribed in terms of a
  xed, well-understood set of primitives.
     The major thrust of this hapter is to draw insights from the study of fun tional
programming to illuminate the world of nan ial ontra ts. More spe i ally, our
 ontributions are the following:

     We de ne a arefully- hosen set of ombinators, and, through an extended
      sequen e of examples in Haskell, we show that these ombinators an indeed
      be used to des ribe a wide variety of ontra ts (Se tion 3).
     Our ombinators an be used to des ribe a ontra t, but we also want to
      pro ess a ontra t. Notably, we want to be able to nd the value of a ontra t.
      In Se tion 4 we des ribe how to give an abstra t valuation semanti s to our
       ombinators. A fundamentally-important property of this semanti s is that
      it is ompositional ; that is, the value of a ompound ontra t is given by
       ombining the values of its sub- ontra ts.
     We sket h an implementation of our valuation semanti s, using as an example
      a simple interest-rate model and its asso iated latti e (Se tion 5).
Stated in this way, our work sounds like a perfe tly routine appli ation of the
idea of using a fun tional language to de ne a domain-spe i ombinator library,
thereby e e tively reating an appli ation-spe i programming language. Su h
languages have been de ned for parsers, musi , animations, hardware ir uits, and
many others [van Deursen et al., 2000℄. However, from the standpoint of nan ial
engineers, our language is truly radi al: they a knowledge that the la k of a pre ise
way to des ribe omplex ontra ts is \the bane of our lives"1.
     It has taken us a long time to boil down the immense soup of a tively-traded
 ontra ts into a reasonably small set of ombinators; but on e that is done, new
vistas open up, be ause a single formal des ription an drive all manner of auto-
mated pro esses. For example, we an generate s hedules for ba k-oÆ e ontra t
exe ution, perform risk analysis optimisations, present ontra ts in new graphi al
ways (e.g. \time-lined" de ision trees), provide animated simulations, and so on.
     This hapter is addressed to a fun tional programming audien e. We will
introdu e any nan ial jargon as we go.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                         3




                            , d , u Contra t
                                   o Observable
                               t , s Date, time
                                   k Curren y
                                   x Dimensionless real value
                                   p Value pro ess
                                   v Random variable

                            Figure 1: Notational onventions



2 Getting started
In this se tion we will informally introdu e our notation for ontra ts, and show
how we an build more ompli ated ontra ts out of simpler ones. We use the
fun tional language Haskell throughout.
2.1 A simple ontra t
Consider the following simple ontra t, whi h might serve as a modest birthday
present for Ri hard: \re eive $100 on 13th February 2003". (A ontra t of this
form is known to the industry as zero- oupon dis ount bond.) We an spe ify this
 ontra t, whi h we name 1, thus:
      1 :: Contra t
      1 = z b t1 100 GBP
Figure 1 summarises the notational onventions we use throughout the hapter for
variables, su h as 1 and t1 in this de nition.
     The ombinator z b used in 1 's de nition has the following type:
     z b :: Date ! Double ! Curren y ! Contra t

     The rst argument to z b is a Date , whi h spe i es a parti ular moment in
time (i.e. both date and time). We provide a fun tion, mkDate , that onverts a
date expressed as a friendly hara ter string to a Date .
     mkDate :: String ! Date
Now we an de ne Ri hard's birthdays in 2003 and 2004 like this:
     t1 t2 :: Date
      ;

  1 The quote is from an informal response to a draft of our work.
4                                                    How to write a nan ial ontra t

    t1 = mkDate \0800GMT 13 Feb 2003"
    t2 = mkDate \0800GMT 13 Feb 2004"


2.2 Combining ontra ts
So z b lets us build a simple ontra t. We an also ombine ontra ts to make
bigger ontra ts. A good example of su h a ombining form is and , whose type is:

    and :: Contra t ! Contra t ! Contra t
Using and we an de ne 3, a ontra t that involves two payments:
      2 3 :: Contra t
      ;

      2 = z b t2 200 GBP
      3 = 1 `and ` 2
That is, if Ri hard holds the ontra t 3 he will bene t from a payment of $100
on his 2003 birthday, and another payment of $200 on his 2004 birthday.
     In general, the ontra ts we an des ribe are between two parties, the holder of
the ontra t, and the ounter-party. Notwithstanding Bibli al advi e (A ts 20.35),
by default the owner of a ontra t re eives the payments, and makes the hoi es,
spe i ed in the ontra t. This situation an be reversed by the give ombinator:
     give :: Contra t ! Contra t
The ontra t give is simply with rights and obligations reversed, a statement
we will make pre ise in Se tion 4.2. Indeed, when two parties agree on a ontra t,
one a quires the ontra t , and the other simultaneously a quires give ; ea h is
the other's ounter-party. For example, 4 is a ontra t whose holder re eives $100
at time t1, and pays $200 at time t2:
      4 = 1 `and ` give 2
So far, ea h of our de nitions has de ned a new ontra t ( 1 , 2 , et .). It is also
easy to de ne a new ombinator (a fun tion that builds a ontra t). For example,
we ould de ne andGive thus:
     andGive :: Contra t ! Contra t ! Contra t
     andGive d = `and ` give d
Now we an give an alternative de nition of 4 (whi h we built earlier):
      4 = 1 `andGive ` 2
This ability to de ne new ombinators, and use them just as if they were built in,
is quite routine for fun tional programmers, but not for nan ial engineers.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                                                        5


    zero :: Contra t
         zero is a      ontra t that has no rights and no obligations.


    one :: Curren y      !   Contra t
         If you a quire (one k ) you immediately re eive one unit of the                      urren y k .


    give :: Contra t     !   Contra t
         To a quire (give          ) is to a quire all         's rights as obligations, and vi e versa.

         Note that for a bilateral               ontra t q between parties A and B , A a quiring

         q implies that B a quires (give q ).

    and :: Contra t      !   Contra t      !     Contra t
         If you a quire (       1 `and `     2 ), you immediately a quire both          1 and    2.

    or :: Contra t     !   Contra t      !      Contra t
         If you a quire (      1 `or `     2 ) you must immediately a quire your           hoi e of either

          1   or   2   (but not both).


     ond :: Obs Bool       !   Contra t      !      Contra t   !   Contra t
         If you a quire (       ond b       1    2 ), you a quire      1 if the observable b is true at
         the moment of a quisition, and                  2   otherwise.


    s ale :: Obs Double        !   Contra t       !   Contra t
         If you a quire (s         ale o    ), then you a quire            at the same moment, ex ept

         that all the payments of                 are multiplied by the value of the observable o

         at the moment of a quisition.

    when :: Obs Bool       !   Contra t         !   Contra t
         If you a quire (when o             ), you must a quire           as soon as observable o subse-

         quently be omes True . It is therefore worthless in states where o will never

         again be True .


    anytime :: Obs Bool        !    Contra t        !   Contra t
         On e you a quire (anytime o                    ), you   may   a quire     at any time the ob-

         servable o is True . The               ompound        ontra t is therefore worthless in states

         where o will never again be True .


    until :: Obs Bool      !   Contra t      !      Contra t
         On e a quired, (until o                ) is exa tly like         ex ept that it   must be aban-
         doned when observable o be omes True .                     In states in whi h o is True , the

          ompound          ontra t is therefore worthless, be ause it must be abandoned

         immediately.

                             Figure 2: Primitives for de ning ontra ts




3 Building ontra ts


We have now ompleted our informal introdu tion. In this se tion we will give the
full set of primitives, and show how a wide variety of other ontra ts an be built
using them. For referen e, Figure 2 gives the primitive ombinators over ontra ts;
we will introdu e these primitives as we need them.
6                                                              How to write a nan ial ontra t


     konst :: a ! Obs a
           (konst x ) is an observable that has value x at any time.
     lift :: (a ! b ) ! Obs a ! Obs b
           (lift f o ) is the observable whose value is the result of applying f to
           the value of the observable o .
     lift2 :: (a ! b ! ) ! Obs a ! Obs b ! Obs
           (lift2 f o1 o2) is the observable whose value is the result of applying f
           to the values of the observables o1 and o2 .
     date :: Obs Date
           The value of the observable date at date s is just s .
     instan e Num a => Num (Obs a )
           All numeri operations lift to the Obs type. The implementation is
           simple, using lift and lift2 .
                            Figure 3: Primitives over observables



3.1 A quisition date and observables
Figure 2 gives an English-language, but quite pre ise, des ription of ea h ombina-
tor. To do so, it uses two on epts that we must introdu e rst: the notions of an
a quisition date, and an observable.
      Our language des ribes what a ontra t is. However, the onsequen es for the
holder of the ontra t depend on the date at whi h the ontra t is a quired; that
is, its a quisition date. (By \ onsequen es for the holder" we mean the payments,
rights and obligations that the ontra t onfers on the holder of a ontra t.) For
example, the ontra t \re eive $100 on 1 Jan 2000 and re eive $100 on 1 Jan 2001"
is worth a lot less if a quired after 1 Jan 2000, be ause, by de nition, any rights
and obligations that fall due before the a quisition date are simply dis arded.
      The se ond fundamental on ept is that of an observable. A real ontra t often
depends on measurable quantities. For example, a ontra t might say \re eive an
amount in dollars equal to the noon Centigrade temperature in Los Angeles";
or \pay an amount in pounds sterling equal to the 3-month LIBOR spot rate2
multiplied by 100". We use the term observable for an obje tive, but possibly
time-varying, even perhaps unknown at ontra ting time quantity. By \obje tive"
we mean that both parties to the ontra t will agree on the value of the observable
at any parti ular time. The time of day, or the temperature in Los Angeles, an
be obje tively measured; but the value to a home-owner of insuring his house is
subje tive, and is not an observable. Observables are thus a di erent \kind of
thing" from ontra ts, so we give them a di erent type:
      date :: Obs Date
    2 The LIBOR spot rate is published daily in the   nan ial press.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                                7

    tempInLA :: Obs Double
In general, a value of type Obs d represents a time-varying quantity of type d . We
will often use the observable date :: Obs Date in what follows.
     Observables and their operations are, of ourse, reminis ent of Fran's be-
haviours [Elliott and Hudak, 1997℄. Like Fran, we provide ombinators for lifting
fun tions to the observable level, lift , lift2 , et . Figure 3 gives the primitive om-
binators over observables for referen e; we will introdu e them as we en ounter
them.
     With these notions in hand, we now explore the ombinators des ribed in
Figure 2.
3.2 Dis ount bonds
Earlier, we des ribed the zero- oupon dis ount bond: \re eive $100 at time t1"
(Se tion 2.1). At that time we assumed that z b was a primitive ombinator, but
in fa t it isn't. It is obtained by omposing no fewer than four more primitive
 ombinators. We begin with the one ombinator:
      5 = one GBP
Figure 2 gives a areful, albeit informal, de nition of one : if you a quire
(one GBP ), you immediately re eive $1.
     But the bond we want pays $100, not $1. We use the ombinator s ale to
\s ale up" the ontra t, thus:
      6 = s ale (konst 100) 5
To a quire (s ale o ) is to a quire the ontra t , but all the payments and re eipts
in are multiplied by the value of observable o . In this ase, we want to s ale by the
 onstant 100, so we use the ombinator konst (from Figure 3) to lift the onstant
100 to an observable whose value is always 100. You may wonder why s ale takes an
observable, rather than simply a onstant; we dis uss that in the next sub-se tion.
     We are not nished with our zero- oupon bond, however. 6 pays the right
amount, but at the wrong time : it pays at the moment of a quisition, whereas
it should pay at date t1 and no earlier. To obtain this e e t we use the when
 ombinator (Figure 2):
      7 = when (at t1 ) 6
If you a quire the ontra t (when o ), where o is a boolean observable, then noth-
ing happens until o be omes True ; when that happens, you immediately a quire
  . So (at t1) should be a boolean observable that be omes True at time t1. We
 an de ne at like this:
     at :: Date ! Obs Bool
     at t = lift2 (==) date (konst t ) | True when (date == t )
8                                                       How to write a nan ial ontra t

The lift2 takes (==), whi h ompares two Date s and retuns a Bool , to a fun tion
that takes two Obs Date arguments and returns an Obs Bool (Figure 3). We use
konst again, to lift the date t to an observable.
      Noti e that if we a quire 7 after t1 we get nothing, be ause (at t1) is True at
the time t1, but then be omes False and stays False forever.
      Putting all this together, we an nally de ne z b orre tly:
      z b :: Date ! Double ! Curren y ! Contra t
      z b t x k = when (at t ) (s ale (konst x ) (one k ))
These de nitions of z b and at e e tively extend our repertoire of ombinators,
just as andGive did in Se tion 2.2, only more usefully. We will ontinually extend
our library of ombinators in this way.
      Why did we go to the trouble of de ning z b in terms of four ombinators,
rather than making it primitive? Be ause it turns out that s ale , when , lift , lift2 ,
and one are all independently useful. Ea h embodies a distin t pie e of fun tional-
ity, and by separating them we signi antly simplify the semanti s and enri h the
algebra of ontra ts (Se tion 4). The ombinators we present are the result of an
extended, iterative pro ess of re nement, leading to an interlo king set of de isions
| programming language designers will be quite familiar with this pro ess.
3.3 Observables and s aling
In the previous se tion we used s ale to s ale a ontra t by a xed quantity. But, as
we saw, s ale s ales a ontra t by an observable, that is, by a time-varying, maybe
unknown in advan e, value:
     s ale :: Obs Double ! Contra t ! Contra t
Why do we want this generality? So- alled \weather derivatives" are a good exam-
ple; a holiday resort might insure against bad weather by buying a ontra t that
pays out an amount depending on the amount of rain:
      8 = s ale rainInCyprus (one USD )
Here we assume that rainInCyprus is a primitive observable:
     rainInCyprus :: Obs Double | Rainfall over a 24 hr period in
                                     | Cyprus, measured in entimetres
If you a quire this ontra t you re eive an amount in dollars equal to the 24-hr
rainfall in Cyprus, expressed in entimetres. Again, we have to be very pre ise in
our de nitions. Exa tly when is the rainfall sampled? Answer (in Figure 2): when
you a quire (s ale o ) you immediately a quire , s aling all the payments and
re eipts in by the value of the observable o sampled at the moment of a quisition.
So we sample the observable at a single, well-de ned moment (the a quisition date)
and then use that single number to s ale the subsequent payments and re eipts in
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                            9

 . The when ombinator is often used to de ne pre isely an a quisition date, but
we will see other possibilities in the next se tions.
     It is not long before one wants to perform arithmeti on observables. For
example, suppose you want to re eive $1,000 for every entimetre of rainfall over
7 m. We an easily do that, using the lift2 ombinator we used earlier:
       9 = s ale (lift2 ()
                        (lift2 ( ) rainInCyprus (konst 7))
                        (konst 1000))
                  (one USD )
This is all rather lumsy, but fortuntely Haskell's type- lass overloading me hanism
allows us to use the arithmeti operators and  dire tly on observables, thus:
       9 = s ale ((rainInCyprus 7)  1000) (one USD )
To a hieve this, we simply need to make Obs into an instan e of Num , thus:
     instan e Num a = Num (Obs a ) where
                                >

      fromInteger i = konst (fromInteger i )
      (+) = lift2 (+)
      ( ) = lift2 ( )
     :::   et :::
Unfortunately, Haskell's type system does not work quite so smoothly for relational
operators, su h as ( ). To redu e notational lutter, we will de ne a family of
                            <

relational operators, thus:
     (% ) (% =) (%=) (% =) (% ) :: Ord a = Obs a ! Obs a ! Obs Bool
           < ;      <   ;           ;     >     ;   >   >

     (% ) = lift2 ( )
           <            <

     (% =) = lift2 ( =) et
           <                <       :::   :::



The s ale ombinator allows an observable to ontrol the size, but not the hara ter,
of a ontra t. The ond ombinator allows an observable to sele t whi h of two
 ontra ts is a quired:
      ond :: Obs Bool ! Contra t ! Contra t
For example, the ontra t
      10 = ond (rainInCyrus % 10) (one GBP ) (one USD )
                                                >



If the rainfall in Cyprus, sampled on the date when 10 is a quired, is more than
10 m, you re eive $1, otherwise you re eive $1.
3.4 Option ontra ts
Mu h of the subtlety in nan ial ontra ts arises be ause the parti ipants an
exer ise hoi es. We en apsulate hoi e in three primitive ombinators, ond , or
10                                                   How to write a nan ial ontra t

and anytime . The rst two allow one to hoose whi h of two ontra ts to a quire,
while the last allows one to hoose when to a quire a ontra t.
      First, we onsider the hoi e between two ontra ts:
      or :: Contra t ! Contra t ! Contra t

When you a quire the ontra t ( 1 `or ` 2 ), you must immediately a quire either
 1 or 2 (but not both). For example, the ontra t
      z b t1 100 GBP `or ` z b t2 110 GBP

gives the holder the right, to hoose immediately to re eive either $100 at t1, or
$110 at t2 .
      A so- alled European option gives the right to hoose, at a parti ular date,
whether or not to a quire an \underlying" ontra t:
      european :: Date ! Contra t ! Contra t

For example, onsider the ontra t 5:
        11 = european (date \1200GMT 24 Apr 2003") (
                z b (mkDate \1200GMT 12 May 2003") 0 4 GBP `and `
                                                     :

                z b (mkDate \1200GMT 12 May 2004") 9 3 GBP `and `
                                                     :

                z b (mkDate \1200GMT 12 May 2005") 109 3 GBP `and `
                                                         :

                give (z b (mkDate \1200GMT 26 Apr 2003") 100 GBP )
               )
This ontra t gives the right to hoose, on 24 Apr 2003, whether or not to a quire an
underlying ontra t onsisting of three re eipts and one payment. In the nan ial
industry, this kind of ontra t is des ribed as a \ all on a oupon bond". As with
z b , we de ne european in terms of simpler elements:
      european :: Date ! Contra t ! Contra t
      european t u = when (at t ) (u `or ` zero )

You an read this de nition as follows:
   The primitive ontra t zero has no rights or obligations (see Figure 2).
   The ontra t (u `or ` zero ) expresses the hoi e between a quiring u and a -
      quiring nothing.
   The when (at t ) onstru t means that the hoi e must be made exa tly at date
      t . If you a quire the European ontra t after t , you get nothing.
      The or ombinator lets us hoose whi h of two ontra ts to a quire. Let us
now onsider the hoi e of when to a quire a ontra t:
      anytime :: Obs Bool ! Contra t ! Contra t
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                           11

A quiring the ontra t anytime o u gives the right to a quire the \underlying"
 ontra t u at any time that the observable o is True.
    An Ameri an option o ers more exibility than a European option. Typi ally,
an Ameri an option onfers the right to a quire an underlying ontra t at any time
between two dates (or not to do so at all).
    ameri an (t1 t2 ) u = anytime (between t1 t2 ) u
                 ;



Here we use another simple ombinator for observables:
    between :: Date ! Date ! Obs Bool
       | True on dates in the spe i ed window
    between t1 t2 = lift2 (&&) (date % = t1 ) (date % = t2 )
                                       >                <




3.5 Limit ontra ts
The last form of ontra t we de ne is a \limit ontra t". Su h ontra ts say \su h-
and-su h happens unless interest rates go above 6%", or \unless the temperature
falls below freezing". To a omodate su h ontra ts we need a way to abandon a
 ontra t, and that is the purpose of the until ombinator. For example:
       12 = until (interestRate % konst 6) (ameri an (t1 t2) )
                                 >                          ;



When you a quire 12 you immediately a quire the underlying Ameri an option,
but as soon as interest rates go above 6% you must abandon the option, whether
or not you have by then exer ised the option and a quired . If you have exer ised
the option, and has paid out some money, you get to keep that, but you abandon
any future bene ts of .

3.6 Summary
We have now given the avour of our approa h to de ning ontra ts. The ombi-
nators we have de ned so far are not enough to des ribe all the ontra ts that are
a tively traded, and we are extending the set in ongoing work. However, our main
 on lusions are una e ted:
    Finan ial ontra ts an be des ribed in a purely de larative way.
    A huge variety of ontra ts an be des ribed in terms of a small number of
      ombinators.
     Identifying the \right" primitive ombinators is quite a hallenge. For example,
it was a breakthrough to identify and separate the two forms of hoi e, or and
anytime , and en apsulate those hoi es (and nothing else) in two ombinators.
Another breakthrough was to use boolean observables to des ribe the \region" in
whi h one an a quire a ontra t.
12                                                       How to write a nan ial ontra t

4    Valuation

We now have at our disposal a ri h language for des ribing nan ial ontra ts.
This is already useful for ommuni ating between people | the industry la ks
any su h pre ise notation. But in addition, a pre ise des ription lends itself to
automati pro essing of various sorts. From a single ontra t des ription we may
hope to generate legal paperwork, pi tures, s hedules and more besides. The most
immediate question one might ask about a ontra t is, however, what is it worth?
That is, what would I pay to own the ontra t? It is to this question that we now
turn.
    We will express ontra t valuation in two \layers":
Abstra t valuation semanti s. First, we will show how to translate an arbitrary
     ontra t, written in our language, into a value pro ess, together with a handful
   of operations over these pro esses. These pro esses orrespond dire tly to the
   mathemati al and sto hasti ma hinery used by nan ial experts.
Con rete implementation. A pro ess is an abstra t mathemati al value. To make
   a omputer al ulate with pro esses we have to represent them somehow |
   this is the step from abstra t semanti s to on rete implementation. An im-
   plementation will onsist of a nan ial model, together with some dis rete
   numeri al method. A tremendous number of di erent nan ial models are
   used today (e.g. Bla k-S holes, Ho-Lee, et .); but only three families of nu-
   meri al methods are widely used in industry: partial di erential equations
   [Willmot et al., 1993℄, Monte Carlo [Boyle et al., 1997℄ and latti e methods
   [Cox et al., 1979℄.
This approa h is strongly reminis ent of the way in whi h a ompiler is typi-
 ally stru tured. The program is rst translated into a low-level but ma hine-
independent intermediate language; many optimisations are applied at this level;
and then the program is further translated into the instru tion set for the desired
pro essor (Pentium, Spar , or whatever).
     In a similar way, we an transform a ontra t into a value pro ess, apply
meaning-preserving optimising transformations to this intermediate representation,
before omputing a value for the pro ess. This latter step an be done interpre-
tatively, or one ould imagine generating spe ialised ode that, when run, would
perform the valuation.
     Indeed, our abstra t semanti s serves as our referen e model for what it means
for two ontra ts to be \the same". For example, here are two laims:
              1 `and ` ( 2 `or ` 3 )   = ( 1 `and ` 2) `or ` ( 1 `and ` 3)
                 give ( 1 `or ` 2 )    = give 1 `or ` give 2
In fa t, the rst is true, and the se ond is not, but how do we know for sure?
Answer: we ompare their valuation semanti s, as we shall see in Se tion 4.6.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                             13


                     Ek [  ℄ : Contra t ! PR R
             (E1)                  Ek [ zero ℄ = K(0)
             (E2)               Ek[ one k2 ℄ = ex hk (k2 )
             (E3)                Ek [ give ℄ =     Ek[ ℄
             (E4)          Ek [ o `s ale ` ℄ = V [ o ℄  Ek [ ℄
             (E5)        Ek [ 1 `and ` 2 ℄ = Ek [ 1 ℄ + Ek [ 2 ℄
             (E6)           Ek [ 1 `or ` 2 ℄ = max (Ek [ 1 ℄ Ek [ 2 ℄ )
                                                                 ;

             (E7)       Ek [ ond o 1 2 ℄ = if (V [ o ℄ Ek [ 1 ℄ Ek [ 2 ℄ )
                                                         ;               ;

             (E8)           Ek [ when o ℄ = dis k (V [ o ℄ Ek [ ℄ )
                                                             ;

             (E9)       Ek [ anytime o ℄ = snellk (V [ o ℄ Ek [ ℄ )
                                                                 ;

             (E10)           Ek[ until o ℄ = absorbk (V [ o ℄ Ek[ ℄ );




              Figure 4: Compositional valuation semanti s for ontra ts



4.1 Value pro esses

De nition 1 (Value pro ess.) A value pro ess, p , over type a , is a (total) fun tion
from time to a random variable of type a . The random variable p (t ) des ribes the
possible values for p at time t . We write the informal type de nition
                                PR a = Date ! RV a
2
(We use aligraphi font for types at the semanti level.) Be ause we need to
work with di erent pro esses de ned on the same \underlying spa e" (te hni ally,
  ltration), su h a value pro ess is more pre isely des ribed as an adapted sto has-
ti pro ess, given a ltration. Su h pro esses ome equipped with a sophisti ated
mathemati al theory [Revuz and Yor, 1991, Musiela and Rutkowski, 1997℄, but it
is unlikely to be familiar to omputer s ientists, so we only present informal, in-
tuitive notions. We usually abbreviate \value pro ess" to simply \pro ess". Be
warned, though: \pro ess" and \variable" mean quite di erent things to their
 onventional omputer s ien e meanings.
      Both ontra ts and observables are modeled as pro esses. The underlying in-
tuitions are as follows:
     The value pro ess for an observable o maps a time t to a random variable
      des ribing the possible values of o at t . For example, the value pro ess for
      the observable \IBM sto k pri e in US$" is a fun tion that maps a time to a
      real-valued random variable that des ribes the possible values of IBM's sto k
      pri e in US$.
14                                                           How to write a nan ial ontra t


                      V [  ℄ : Obs a !         PR a
                            V [ konst x ℄ = K(x )
                                V [ date ℄ = date
                             V [ lift f o ℄ = lift (f V [ o ℄ )
                                                     ;

                      V [ lift2 f o1 o2 ℄ = lift2 (f V [ o1 ℄ V [ o2 ℄ )
                                                         ;     ;




                      Figure 5: Valuation semanti s for observables




      The following primitives are independent of the valuation model
      K : a ! PR a
             The pro ess K(x ) is de ned at all times to have value x .
      date : PR Date
             The pro ess date has as its value the date.
        ond : PR Bools ! PR a ! PR a ! PR a
             Conditional hoi e between the latter two pro esses, based on the rst.
      lift : (a ! b ) ! PR a ! PR b
             Apply the spe i ed fun tion to the argument pro ess point-wise.
      lift2 : (a ! b ! ) ! PR a ! PR b ! PR
             Combine the two argument pro esses point-wise with the spe i ed
             fun tion.
      +  : PR R ! PR R ! PR R
        ;   ;:::

             Add, or multiply (et .) the two pro esses. Equivalent to lift2 (+), et .
                               Figure 6: Pro ess primitives



      The value pro ess for a ontra t , expressed in urren y k is a fun tion from a
    time, t , to a random variable des ribing the value, in urren y k , of a quiring
    the ontra t at time t .
These intuitions are essential to understand the rest of the hapter.

4.2 From ontra ts to pro esses
How, then, are we to go from ontra ts and observables to pro esses? Figure 4
gives the omplete translation from ontra ts to pro esses, while Figure 5 does
the same for observables. These Figures do not look very impressive, but that is
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                                  15


    The following primitives are dependent on the parti ular model
    ex hk () : Curren y ! PR R
         ex hk1 (k2 ) is a real-valued pro ess representing the value of one unit of
         k2 , expressed in urren y k1 . This is simply the pro ess representing
         the quoted ex hange rate between the urren ies.
    dis k ( ) : PR B  PR R ! PR R
           ;

         Given a boolean-valued pro ess o , the primitive dis k (o p ) transforms
                                                                    ;

         the real-valued pro ess p , expressed in urren y k , into another real-
         valued pro ess. In states where o is True , the result is the same as p ;
         elsewhere, the result is its \fair" equivalent sto hasti value pro ess in
         the same urren y k .
    snellk ( ) : PR B  PR R ! PR R
               ;

         The primitive snellk (o p ) al ulates the Snell envelope of its argument
                                ;

         p , under observable o . It uses the probability measure asso iated with
         the urren y k .
    absorbk ( ) : PR B  PR R ! PR R
                   ;

         Given a boolean-valued pro ess o , the primitive absorbk (o p ) trans-
                                                                         ;

         forms the real-valued pro ess p , expressed in urren y k , into another
         real-valued pro ess. For any state, the result is the expe ted value of
         re eiving p 's value if the region o will never be True , and re eiving
         zero in the ontrary. In states where o is True , the result is therefore
         zero.
                              Figure 7: Model primitives



the whole point! Everything so far has been leading up to this point; our entire
design is organised around the desire to give a simple, tra table, modular valuation
semanti s. Let us look at Figure 4 in more detail.
      The fun tion Ek[ ℄ takes a ontra t, , and maps it to a pro ess des ribing,
for ea h moment in time, the value in urren y k of a quiring at that moment.
For example, the equation for give (E3) says that the value pro ess for give is
simply the negation of Ek[ ℄ , the value pro ess for . Aha! What does \negation"
mean? Clearly, we need not only the notion of a value pro ess, but also a olle tion
of operations over these pro esses. Negating a pro ess is one su h operation; the
negation of a pro ess p is simply a fun tion that maps ea h time, t , to the negation
of p (t ). It is an absolutely straightforward exer ise to \lift" all operations on real
numbers to operate point-wise on pro esses. (This, in turn, requires us to negate a
random variable, but doing so is simple.) We will need a number of other operations
over pro esses. They are summarised in Figures 6 and 7, but we will introdu e ea h
one as we need it.
      Next, onsider equation (E5). The and of two ontra ts is modeled simply by
16                                                           How to write a nan ial ontra t

taking the sum of their two value pro esses. Equation (E6) does the same for the
or ombinator. Again, by design, the ombinator maps to a simple mathemati al
operation, max .
     Equation (E4) is ni e and simple. To s ale a ontra t by a time-varying
observable o , we simply multiply the value pro ess for the ontra t Ek[ ℄ by the
value pro ess for the observable | remember that we are modeling ea h observable
by a value pro ess. We express the latter as V [ o ℄ , de ned in Figure 5 in a very
similar fashion to Ek[ ℄ . At rst this seems odd: how an we s ale point-wise,
when the s aling applies to future payments and re eipts in ? Re all that the
value pro ess for at a time t gives the value of a quiring at t . Well, if this value
is v then the value of a quiring the same ontra t with all payments and re eipts
s aled by x is ertainly v  x . Our de nition of s ale in Figure 2 was in fa t driven
dire tly by our desire to express its semanti s in a simple way. Simple semanti s
gives rise to simple algebrai properties (Se tion 4.6).
     The equations for zero and ond are also easy. Equation (E1) delivers the
 onstant zero pro ess, while Equation (E7) uses the underlying onditional.
4.3 Ex hange rates
The operations over value pro esses de ned in Figure 6 are generi { they are
unrelated to a parti ular nan ial model. But we an't get away with that forever.
The primitives in Figure 7 are spe i to nan ial ontra ts, and they are used in
the remaining equations of Figure 4.
     Consider equation (E2) in Figure 4. It says that the value pro ess for one unit
of urren y k2, expressed in urren y k , is simply the ex hange-rate pro ess be-
tween k2 and k namely ex hk (k2 ) (Figure 7). Where do we get these ex hange-rate
pro esses from? When we ome to implementation, we will need some (numeri-
 al) assumption about future evolution of ex hange rates, but for now it suÆ es
to treat the ex hange-rate pro esses as primitives. However, there are important
relationships between them! Notably:
                  (A1)                  ex hk (k ) = K(1)
                  (A2) ex hk2 (k1) * ex hk3 (k2 ) = ex hk3 (k1 )
That is, the ex hange-rate pro ess between a urren y and itself is everywhere
unity; and it makes no di eren e whether we onvert k1 dire tly into k3 or whether
we go via some intermediate urren y k2 . These are parti ular ases of no-arbitrage
 onditions3.
     You might also wonder what has be ome of the bid-o er spread en ountered by
every traveller at the foreign-ex hange ounter. In order to keep things te hni ally
tra table, nan e theory assumes most of the time the absen e of any spreads: one
typi ally rst omputes a \fair" pri e, before nally adding a pro t margin. It
is the latter whi h gives rise to the spread, but our modeling applies only to the
former.
   3 A no-arbitrage ondition is one that ex ludes a risk-free opportunity to earn money. If su h
an opportunity were to exist, everyone would take it, and the opportunity would soon go away!
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                                          17

4.4 Interest rates
Next, onsider equation (E8). The ontra t (when o ) a quires the underlying
 ontra t as soon as the observable o be omes True , or immediately if o is True
at the moment (when o ) is a quired. In states where o is True , the value of
(when o ) is therefore the same as the value of . What is the value of (when o )
in states where o is False ? To answer that question we need a spe i ation of
future evolution of interest rates, that is an interest-rate model.
     Let's onsider a on rete example:
       = when (at t ) (s ale (konst 10) (one GBP ))
where t is one year from today. The underlying ontra t pays out $10 immediately
when it is a quired; the when a quires it at t . So the value of at t is just $10.
Before t , though, it is not worth as mu h. If I expe t interest rates to average4
(say) 10% over the next year, a fair pri e for today would be about $9.
     Just as the primitive ex h en apsulates assumptions about future ex hange-
rate evolution, so the primitive dis k (o p ) en apsulates an interest-rate evolution
                                               ;

(Figure 7). Here o is a boolean-valued pro ess that de nes a region that we all
the a quisition region. Inside this region | in states where o has value True
| dis k (o p ) is equal to p . But elsewhere the value of dis k (o p ) is obtained
           ;                                                                   ;

by omputing the \dis ounted expe ted value" of p . For example, suppose p is
everywhere equal to 100, and o is True at all times greater than 1 Jan 2003. Then
the value of dis $ (o p ) at 1 Feb 2003 is 100. However, its value at 1 Jan 2002
                        ;

depends on sterling interest rates: we must ompute the value at 1 Jan 2002 of
a quiring $100 on 1 Jan 2003.
     Like ex h, there are some properties that any no-arbitrage nan ial model
should satisfy. Notably:
           (A3)          dis k (K(True ) p ) = p
                                           ;

           (A4) ex hk1 (k2)  dis k2 (o p ) = dis k1 (o ex hk1 (k2 )  p )
                                           ;                       ;

           (A5)           dis k (o p1 + p2 ) = dis k (o p1 ) + dis k (o p2 )
                                       ;                       ;                   ;



The rst equation says that dis should be the identity when the a quisition region
is the entire spa e; the se ond says that the interest-rate evolution of di erent
 urren ies should be ompatible with the assumption of evolution of ex hange rates.
The third5 is often used in a right-to-left dire tion as an optimisation: rather than
perform dis ounting on two random variables separately, and then add the resulting
pro esses, it is faster to add the random variables and then dis ount the result.
Just as in an optimising ompiler, we may use identities like these to transform
(the meaning of) our ontra t into a form that is faster to exe ute.
     One has to be areful, though. Here is a plausible property that does not hold:
               dis k (o max (p1 p2 )) = max (dis k (o p1 ) dis k (o p2 ))
                            ;      ;                       ;       ;      ;

  4 For the asso iated risk-neutral probability, but we will not go in these nan ial details here.
  5 The nan ially edu ated reader should note that we assume here impli itly what are alled
omplete markets.
18                                                         How to write a nan ial ontra t

It is plausible be ause it would hold if p1 p2 were single numbers and dis were a
                                           ;

simple multipli ative fa tor. But p1 and p2 are random pro esses, and the property
is false.
      Equation (E9) uses the snell operator to give the meaning of anytime . This
operator is mathemati ally subtle, but it has a simple hara terisation: snellk (o p );

is the smallest pro ess q (under an ordering relation we mention brie y at the end
of Se tion 4.6) su h that
                         8o (o ) o ) ) q  snellk (o q )
                           0
                               :
                                       0                    0
                                                                ;



That is, an Ameri an option is the least upper bound of any of the deterministi
a quisition hoi es spe i ed by o , where o is a sub-region of o .
                                   0           0




4.5 Observables
We an only value ontra ts over observables that we an model. For example, we
 an only value a ontra t involving the temperature in Los Angeles if we have a
model of the temperature in Los Angeles. Some su h observables learly require
separate models. Others, su h as the LIBOR rate and the pri e of futures, an
in estuously be modeled as the value of parti ular ontra ts. We omit all the
details here; Figure 5 gives the semanti s only for the simplest observables. This is
not unrealisti , however. One an write a large range of ontra ts with our ontra t
 ombinators and only these simple observables.
4.6 Reasoning about ontra ts
Now we are ready to use our semanti s to answer the questions we posed at the
beginning of Se tion 4. First, is this equation valid?
                1 `and ` ( 2 `or ` 3 ) = ( 1 `and ` 2 ) `or ` ( 1 `and ` 3 )
By taking the meaning of the left hand side, we get
                       Ek [ LHS ℄ = 1 + (max ( 2 3 ))  ;

                                     = max ( 1 + 2 1 + 3 ))
                                                   ;

                                     = Ek[ RHS ℄
where 1 = Ek[ 1℄ et . In a similar way, we an argue this plausible equation is
false:
                       give ( 1 `or ` 2 ) =? give 1 `or ` give 2
The proof is routine, but its ore is the observation that
                               max (a b ) 6= max ( a b )
                                       ;           ;



Ba k in the real world, the point is that the left hand side gives the hoi e to the
 ounter-party, whereas in the right hand side the hoi e is made by the holder of
the ontra t.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                               19

      Our ombinators satisfy a ri h set of equalities, su h as that given for or and
and above. Some of these equalities have side onditions. For example:
      s ale o ( 1 `or ` 2 ) = s ale o 1 `or ` s ale o 2

holds only if o  0, for exa tly the same reason that give does not ommute with
or . Hang on! What does it mean to say that \o  0"? We mean that o is positive
for all time. More generally, as well as equalities between ontra ts, there is a
simple notion of ordering between ontra ts, 1  2, pronoun ed \ 1 dominates
 2 " : 1  2 if it is never at any time preferable to a quire 2 than to a quire
 1 . The ordering is de ned by simply omparing the value pro esses of the two
 ontra ts; that is, 1  2 i E[ 1℄  E[ 2 ℄ . One value pro ess is greater than
another i it is greater in all states of the world. (The ordering is only a partial
one.)
      Equalities, su h as the ones given above, an be used as optimising transfor-
mations in a valuation engine. A \ ontra t ompiler" an use these identities to
transform a ontra t, expressed in the intermediate language of value pro esses
(see the introdu tion to Se tion 4), into a form that an be valued more eÆ iently.

4.7 Summary
This ompletes our des ription of the abstra t valuation semanti s. From a
programming-language point of view, everything is quite routine, in luding our
proofs. But we stress that it is most unusual to nd formal proofs in the nan e
industry at this level of abstra tion. We have named and tamed the ompli ated
primitives (dis , ex h , et .): the laws they must satisfy give us a way to prove iden-
tities about ontra ts without having to understand mu h about random variables.
The mathemati al details are ar ane, believe us!

5 Implementation

Our valuation semanti s is not only an abstra t beast. We an also regard Figures 4
and 5 as a translation from our ontra t language into a lower-level language of
pro esses, whose ombinators are the primitives of Figures 6 and 7. Then we an
optimise the pro ess-level des ription, using identities su h as (A1)-(A5). (We use
dozens of su h identities as transformation rules.) Finally, all we need to do is to
implement the pro ess-level primitives, and we will be able to value an arbitrary
 ontra t.
     The key de ision is, of ourse, how we implement a value pro ess. A value
pro ess has to represent un ertainty about the future in an expli it way. There
are numerous ways to model this un ertainty. For the sake of on reteness, we
will simply pi k the Ho and Lee model, and use a latti e method to evaluate
 ontra ts with it [Ho and Lee, 1986℄. We hoose this model and numeri al method
for their te hni al simpli ity and histori al importan e, but mu h of this se tion is
also appli able to other models (e.g. Bla k-Derman-Toy). Changing the numeri al
20                                                      How to write a nan ial ontra t




                                                      8%

                                             7%

                                   6%
                                                      6%

                          5%
                                             5%

                                   4%                 4%

                                             3%

                                                      2%
                          Time step
                          0        1          2        3


                    Figure 8: A short term interest-rate evolution



method (e.g. to Monte Carlo) would entail bigger hanges, but nothing in our
language or its semanti s (Se tions 1-4) would be a e ted. Indeed, it is entirely
possible to use di erent numeri al methods for di erent parts of a single ontra t.
5.1 An interest-rate model
In the typi al Ho and Lee numeri al s heme, the interest-rate evolution is repre-
sented by a latti e (or \re ombining tree"), as depi ted in Figure 8. Ea h olumn
of the tree represents a dis rete time step, and time in reases from left to right.
Time zero represents \now". As usual with dis rete models, there is an issue of
how long a time step will be; we won't dis uss that further here, but we note in
passing that the time steps need not be of uniform size.
     At ea h node of the tree is asso iated a one-period short-term interest rate,
shortly denominated the interest rate from now on. We know today's interest
rate, so the rst olumn in the tree has just one element. However, there is some
un ertainty of what interest rates will evolve to by the end of the rst time step.
This is expressed by having two interest-rate values in the se ond olumn; the idea
is that the interest rate will evolve to one of these two values with equal probability.
In the third time step, the rates split again, but the down/up path joins the up/down
path, so there are only three rates in the third olumn, not four. This is why the
stru ture is alled a latti e; it makes the whole s heme omputationally feasible by
giving only a linear growth in the width of the tree with time. Of ourse, the tree
is only a dis rete approximation of a ontinuous pro ess; its re ombining nature
is just a hoi e for eÆ ien y reasons. We write Rt for the ve tor of rates in time-
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                             21




                                                      10

                                             9.35

                                   8.90
                                                      10

                            8.64
                                             9.52

                                   9.25               10

                                             9.71

                                                      10
                            Time step
                             0      1         2        3


                        Figure 9: A Ho and Lee valuation latti e



step t , and Rt i for the i 'th member of that ve tor, starting with 0 at the bottom.
              ;

Thus, for example, R2 1 = 5%. The a tual numbers in Figure 8 are unrealisti ally
                        ;

regular: in more elaborate interest-rate models, they will not be evenly spa ed but
only monotoni ally distributed in ea h olumn.
5.2 Value pro esses
So mu h for the interest-rate model. A value pro ess is modeled by a latti e of
exa tly the same shape as the interest-rate evolution, ex ept that we have a value
at ea h node instead of an interest rate. Figure 9 shows the value pro ess tree for
our favourite zero- oupon bond
      7 = when (at t ) (s ale (konst 10) (one GBP ))
evaluated in pounds sterling (GBP ). Using our valuation semanti s we have
                EGBP [ 7 ℄ = dis $ (date = t K(10)  ex h$ ($))
                                                  ;

                            = dis $ (date = t K(10)  K(1))
                                                  ;

                            = dis $ (date = t K(10))
                                                  ;


In the gure, we assume that the time t is time step 3. At step 3, therefore,
the value of the ontra t is ertainly 10 at all nodes, be ause un onditionally
delivers $10 at that time. At time step 2, however, we must dis ount the $10 by
the interest rate appropriate to that time step. We ompute the value at ea h node
of time-step 2 by averaging the two values in its su essors, and then dis ounting
22                                                           How to write a nan ial ontra t

the average value ba k one time step using the interest rate asso iated to that
node6 . Using the same notation for the value tree V as we used for the rate model
R, we get the equation:
                                    V
                            Vt i = t+1 i
                                           + Vt+1 i+1
                                              ;          ;
                                   ;
                                      2(1 + Rt i t );



where t is the size of the time step. Using this equation we an ll in the rest of
the values in the tree, as we have done in Figure 9. The value in time step 0 is the
 urrent value of the ontra t, in pounds sterling (i.e. $8 64).   :

     In short, a latti e implementation works as follows:
      A value pro ess is represented by a latti e, in whi h ea h olumn is a dis rete
       representation of a random variable. The value in ea h node is one of the
       possible values the variable an take, and in our very simple setting the number
       of paths from the root to the node is proportional to the probability that the
       variable will take that value. We will say a bit more about how to represent
       su h a tree in the next subse tion.
      The generi operations, in Figure 6, are easy to implement. K(x ) is a value
       pro ess that is everywhere equal to x . date is a pro ess in whi h the values in
       a parti ular olumn are all equal to that olumn's date. lift (f p ) applies f to p
                                                                           ;

       point-wise; lift2 (f p1 p2 ) \zips together" p1 and p2, ombining orresponding
                         ;   ;

       values point-wise with f .
      The model-spe i operations of Figure 7 are a bit harder. We have des ribed
       how to implement dis , whi h uses the interest-rate model. ex h is a tually
       rather easier (multiply the value pro ess point-wise by a pro ess representing
       the ex hange rate). The snell and absorb primitives take a bit more work,
       and we do not des ribe them in detail here. Nevertheless, to give the idea,
       here is a possible implementation for snell : take the nal olumn of the tree,
       dis ount it ba k one time step, take the maximum of that olumn with the
        orresponding olumn of the original tree, and then repeat that pro ess all the
       way ba k to the root.
     The remaining high-level question is: in the (big) set of possible interest-rate
models, what is a \good" model? The answer is rather in estuous. A andidate
interest-rate model should pri e orre tly those ontra ts that are widely traded:
one an simply look up the urrent market pri es for them, and ompare them with
the al ulated results. So we look for and later adjust the interest-rate model until
it ts the market data for these simple ontra ts. Now we are ready to use the
model to ompute pri es for more exoti ontra ts. The entire market is a giganti
feedba k system, and a tive resear h studies the problem of its stability.
   6 For evident presentation reasons, we don't are about the fa t that the Ho and Lee model is
a member of a lass of models that admit in fa t a losed-form solution for zero- oupon bonds.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                               23

6 Operational semanti s
So far we have only dis ussed valuing a ontra t. Another operation ripe for
automated assistan e is exe uting, or managing, a ontra t. Banks hold thousands
of ontra ts, and it is no simple matter to remember when to pay out money, when
money is due in, and when hoi es (for options) ould be made.
     Contra ts evolve over time. For example, a ontra t that started life as
                                 when (at t ) ( 1 `or ` 2 )
evolves at time t into ( 1 `or ` 2 ), and hen e either into 1 or into 2. This evolution
is reminis ent of the way in whi h a program evolves over its exe ution run. Indeed,
we an regard exe uting a ontra t as rather like running a program. Programming
language folk use operational semanti s to des ribe the evolution of a running
program in a pre ise way, and we an do the same for ontra ts.
     Spa e pre ludes a full treatment here. SuÆ e it to say that it is relatively easy
to give rules that des ribe how a ontra t evolves over time, and implementing
those rules in an automati system is straightforward. The very same ontra t
des ription that drives the ontra t valuation engine an also drive the ontra t
management engine. As in the ase of the valuation engine, the management engine
must be enhan ed only when new primitive ombinators are added | it an deal
automati ally with arbitrary ontra ts built from the primitives it knows about.
     Not only that, but the state of a partly-exe uted ontra t is still a ontra t
term, and as su h it an be fed into the ontra t valuation engine. Thus the bank
 an at any time value its entire \book" of partly-exe uted ontra ts simply by
feeding them into its valuation engine.

7 Putting our work in ontext
At rst sight, nan ial ontra ts and fun tional programming do not have mu h
to do with ea h other. It has been a surprise and delight to dis over that many of
the insights useful in the design, semanti s, and implementation of programming
languages an be applied dire tly to the des ription, valuation, and management
of ontra ts. The original idea was to apply fun tional programming to a realisti
problem, and to ompare our resulting program with the existing imperative version
| but we have ended up with a radi al re-thinking of how to des ribe and evaluate
 ontra ts.
     Though there is a great deal of work on domain-spe i programming lan-
guages (see [Hudak, 1996, van Deursen et al., 2000℄ for surveys), our work is vir-
tually the only attempt to give a formal des ription to nan ial ontra ts. An ex-
 eption is the RISLA language developed at CWI [van Deursen and Klint, 1998℄,
an obje t-oriented domain-spe i language for nan ial ontra ts. RISLA is de-
signed for an obje t-oriented framework, and appears to be more stateful and less
de larative than our system.
     We have presented our design as a ombinator library embedded in Haskell,
and indeed Haskell has proved an ex ellent host language for prototyping both
24                                                  How to write a nan ial ontra t

the library design and various implementation hoi es. However, our design is
absolutely not Haskell-spe i . The big payo omes from a de larative approa h
to des ribing ontra ts. As it happens we also used a fun tional language for
implementing the ontra t language, but that is somewhat in idental. It ould
equally well be implemented as a free-standing domain-spe i language, using
domain-spe i ompiler te hnology.
     Many appli ation areas use one or more ad ho languages to spe ify domain
obje ts, although su h languages are usually thought of as \data le formats"
rather than a \language". The work we des ribe here is a good example of the
power of the linguisti approa h: not only an we des ribe a mu h ri her family of
 ontra ts than any ommer ial system, but the language stru ture leads dire tly
to a modular and robust software framework. Prin ipled thinking has a pra ti al
payo .

A knowledgements

We warmly thank John Wisbey, Jurgen Gaiser-Porter, and Mal olm Pymm at Lom-
bard Risk Systems Ltd for their ollaboration. They invested a great deal of time
in edu ating one of the present authors (Peyton Jones) in the mysteries of nan-
 ial ontra ts and the Bla k-Derman-Toy valuation model. Jean-Mar Eber warmly
thanks Philippe Artzner for many helpful dis ussions and Pierre Weis for numerous
advi es. We also thank Conal Elliott, Jeremy Gibbons, Andrew Kennedy, Stephen
Jarvis, Andy Moran, Chris Okasaki, Norman Ramsey, Colin Run iman, Ganesh
Sittampalam, David Vin ent and the ICFP referees, for their helpful feedba k.

Referen es

[Boyle et al., 1997℄ Boyle, P., Broadie, M., and Glasserman, P. (1997). Monte
   arlo methods for se urity pri ing. Journal of E onomi Dynami s and
  Control, 21:1267{1321.
[Claessen and Sands, 1999℄ Claessen, K. and Sands, D. (1999). Observable
  sharing for fun tional ir uit des ription. In Thiagarajan, P. and Yap, R.,
  editors, Advan es in Computing S ien e (ASIAN'99); 5th Asian Computing
  S ien e Conferen e, Le ture Notes in Computer S ien e, pages 62{73. Springer
  Verlag.
[Cook and Laun hbury, 1997℄ Cook, B. and Laun hbury, J. (1997). Disposable
  memo fun tions. In Laun hbury, J., editor, Haskell workshop, Amsterdam.
[Cook et al., 1998℄ Cook, B., Laun hbury, J., and Matthews, J. (1998).
  Spe ifying supers alar mi ropro essors in Hawk. In Formal te hniques for
  hardware and hardware-like systems, Marstrand, Sweden.
[Cox et al., 1979℄ Cox, J. C., Ross, S. A., and Rubinstein, M. (1979). Option
  pri ing: a simpli ed approa h. Journal of Finan ial E onomi s, 7:229{263.
Peyton Jones and Eber                                                            25

[Elliott and Hudak, 1997℄ Elliott, C. and Hudak, P. (1997). Fun tional rea tive
   animation. In ACM SIGPLAN International Conferen e on Fun tional
   Programming (ICFP'97), pages 263{273. ACM, Amsterdam.
[Finne et al., 1999℄ Finne, S., Leijen, D., Meijer, E., and Peyton Jones, S. (1999).
   Calling Hell from Heaven and Heaven from Hell. In ACM SIGPLAN
   International Conferen e on Fun tional Programming (ICFP'99), pages
   114{125, Paris. ACM.
[Ho and Lee, 1986℄ Ho, T. and Lee, S. (1986). Term Stru ture Movements and
   Pri ing Interest Rate Contingent Claims. Journal of Finan e, 41:1011{1028.
[Hudak, 1996℄ Hudak, P. (1996). Building domain-spe i embedded languages.
   ACM Computing Surveys, 28.
[Hughes, 1985℄ Hughes, J. (1985). Lazy memo-fun tions. In Pro Aspenas
   workshop on implementation of fun tional languages.
[Leroy et al., 1999℄ Leroy, X., Vouillon, J., Doligez, D., et al. (1999). The
   Obje tive Caml system, release 3.00. Te hni al Report, INRIA, available at
   http:// aml.inria.fr/o aml.
[Marlow et al., 1999℄ Marlow, S., Peyton Jones, S., and Elliott, C. (1999).
   Stret hing the storage manager: weak pointers and stable names in Haskell. In
   Koopman, P. and Cla k, C., editors, International Workshop on Implementing
   Fun tional Languages (IFL'99), number 1868 in Le ture Notes in Computer
   S ien e, Lo hem, The Netherlands. Springer Verlag.
[Musiela and Rutkowski, 1997℄ Musiela, M. and Rutkowski, M. (1997).
   Martingale Methods in Finan ial Modelling. Springer.
[Peyton Jones et al., 1999℄ Peyton Jones, S., Hughes, R., Augustsson, L., Barton,
   D., Boutel, B., Burton, W., Fasel, J., Hammond, K., Hinze, R., Hudak, P.,
   Johnsson, T., Jones, M., Laun hbury, J., Meijer, E., Peterson, J., Reid, A.,
   Run iman, C., and Wadler, P. (1999). Report on the programming language
   Haskell 98. http:/haskell.org.
[Revuz and Yor, 1991℄ Revuz, D. and Yor, M. (1991). Continuous Martingales
   and Brownian Motion. Springer.
[van Deursen et al., 2000℄ van Deursen, A., Kline, P., and Visser, J. (2000).
   Domain-spe i languages: an annotated bibliography. Te hni al report,
   Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informati a, Amsterdam.
[van Deursen and Klint, 1998℄ van Deursen, A. and Klint, P. (1998). Little
   languages: little maintenan e? Journal of Software Maintenan e, 10:75{92.
[Willmot et al., 1993℄ Willmot, P., Dewyne, J., and Howison, S. (1993). Option
   Pri ing: Mathemati al Models and Computation. Oxford Finan ial Press.
