USD1
The Dollar.
Upgraded.
Digital dollar stablecoins that are accepted both on-chain and in the real world.
Get USD1
It's still the US Dollar, but for a new era
Stable & fully backed
USD1 is redeemable 1:1 for U.S. dollars. USD1 is backed by dollars and U.S. Government Money Market Funds.
1
Multichain
Supported on multiple blockchain networks for easy adoption and integration.
Built for businesses & developers
USD1 is broadly available to institutions, individuals, and DeFi participants.
Widely available
USD1 settles on-chain in seconds worldwide, anytime, 24/7.
Reduced costs
Make accessible global payments.
Transparent reserves
Full transparency with monthly attestation reports.
Get USD1
Get USD1 from our trusted partners and protocols.
See all providers
Get in touch about minting
Got USD1? Let's get things moving
If you already hold USD1, take advantage of our tools to bridge or convert your tokens.
Bridge
.
Easily and securely transfer your USD1 tokens between integrated networks.
2
Start bridging
Convert
.
Quickly and securely convert other cryptocurrencies for USD1 and vice versa.
3
Coming soon
Solving real problems, one use case at a time
Cross-border payments
Move money faster and cheaper with nearly instant settlement in USD1.
Global dollar access
Bring secure and reliable digital dollar stablecoins to users around the globe.
Payment received
15m ago
You received 4745 USD1.
DeFi & capital markets
Leverage USD1 for lending, borrowing, and digital asset trading.
Agentic payments
Let AI agents make payments, hold funds, and move money across chains with policy enforcement and human approval built in.
See AgentPay SDK
Transparent. Secure. Stable.
USD1 is 100% backed by U.S. cash, U.S. government money market funds, and other cash equivalents, to help ensure stability and liquidity at all times.
Regular reports & real-time proof of reserves
Fully redeemable for USD
1
USD1 total supply
Total reserves backing USD1
Collateralization ratio
as of
Monthly reports
USD1 reserve reports are published for transparency purposes only and are published on a monthly basis.
View reports
See all reports
See Proof of Reserves
Born to be multichain
USD1 is available on leading blockchain networks, with more integrations on the way.
Bridge USD1
See all integrations
Your questions, answered
What is USD1?
How is USD1 fully backed to be 1:1 with the US Dollar?
Can I convert my USD1 into fiat currency?
Where can I use USD1?
Are USD1 reserves examined?