View All News
BlackRock and Securitize Debut New BUIDL Share Class on Solana Network
March 25, 2025
Miami, FL
–
Securitize today announced that the BlackRock USD Institutional Digital Liquidity Fund (BUIDL), which is tokenized by Securitize, will now expand access with the launch of a new share class on the Solana network.
BUIDL recently surpassed $1B in assets under management, a key milestone in the development of the tokenized treasury market. Securitize and BlackRock launched BUIDL in March of 2024, marking BlackRock’s first tokenized fund to be issued on a public blockchain.
BUIDL offers qualified investors access to U.S. dollar yields on-chain with flexible custody, daily dividend payouts, and near real-time 24/7/365 peer-to-peer transfers. With the expansion to Solana, investors can now utilize BUIDL in the Solana ecosystem, known for the speed, throughput, and cost-effectiveness of the Solana blockchain.
BUIDL is now available on seven blockchains, Aptos, Arbitrum, Avalanche, Ethereum, Optimism, Polygon, and Solana, with cross-chain interoperability enabled by Wormhole to facilitate seamless and secure token transfers. This expansion furthers optionality and increased access for investors, decentralized autonomous organizations (DAOs), and other digital asset-native firms.
Custodians supporting BUIDL investors include Anchorage Digital, Copper, and Fireblocks, among others, and Bank of New York Mellon serves as BUIDL’s cash and securities custodian.
“In the year since BUIDL’s launch, we’ve experienced significant growth in demand for tokenized real-world assets, reinforcing the value of bringing institutional-grade products on-chain,” said Carlos Domingo, Co-founder and CEO of Securitize. “As the market for RWAs and tokenized treasuries gains momentum, expanding BUIDL to Solana—a blockchain known for its speed, scalability, and cost efficiency—is a natural next step.”
“Solana is uniquely positioned to drive the next wave of adoption for tokenized real-world assets due to the network’s speed, low costs and active developer ecosystem,” said Lily Liu, President of the Solana Foundation. “Blackrock’s expansion of BUIDL on Solana offers users a network that balances innovation with the operational efficiency the industry demands.
About Wormhole
Wormhole is the leading interoperability platform that powers multichain applications and bridges at scale. Wormhole provides developers, institutions, and users seamless connectivity between over 30 leading blockchain networks. The wider Wormhole network is trusted and used by teams like Google Cloud, AMD, Circle and Uniswap. To date, the platform has enabled over $55 billion in cross-chain volume, the most of any protocol in the world. Learn more at wormhole.com.
Contact:
[email protected]
About Securitize
Securitize, the leader in tokenizing real-world assets, is bringing the world on-chain through tokenized funds in partnership with top-tier asset managers, such as Apollo, BlackRock, Hamilton Lane, KKR and others. Securitize, through its subsidiaries, is a SEC-registered broker-dealer, digital transfer agent, fund administrator, and operator of a SEC-regulated Alternative Trading System (ATS). Securitize has also been recognized as a 2025 Forbes Top 50 Fintech company. For more information, please visit
www.securitize.io.
Securitize Media Contact
Tom Murphy
[email protected]
About Solana
Solana is a blockchain built for mass adoption. It's a high-performance network that is utilized for a range of use cases, including finance, NFTs, payments, and gaming. Solana operates as a single global state machine, and is open, interoperable and decentralized. For more information, please visit
https://solana.com
.
Management Fee: 20 bps
Token Address:
https://solscan.io/token/GyWgeqpy5GueU2YbkE8xqUeVEokCMMCEeUrfbtMw6phr
Solana Media Contact
[email protected]
Securitize Disclosures
Securities are offered through Securitize Markets, LLC, (“Securitize Markets”) a registered broker-dealer and member FINRA/SIPC. Securitize Markets, LLC, and Securitize Capital, an Exempt Reporting Adviser, are not involved in Real-World Asset (RWA) tokenization, a service provided by Securitize. Assets such as digital assets or tokens using blockchain, are speculative, involve a high degree of risk, are generally illiquid, may have no value, have limited regulatory certainty, are subject to potential market manipulation risks and may expose investors to loss of principal.
Securitize, Inc. (Securitize) is a Delaware corporation. Securitize is a technology provider which, together with its affiliates, maintains an end-to-end web-based platform used by issuers for issuing securities, specifically including digital asset securities. Securitize is not a registered broker-dealer.
Securitize, LLC is a transfer agent registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission.
Securitize Markets also operates Securitize Markets ATS, an alternative trading system. Securitize Capital, LLC is an exempt reporting adviser filed with the State of Florida.
View All News