English
日本語
한국어
Pусский
简体中文
Español
English
English
日本語
한국어
Pусский
简体中文
Español
English
Search for articles...
All Collections
Getting started with 1inch
Why is using 1inch better than a DEX (like Uniswap or Pancakeswap)?
Why is using 1inch better than a DEX (like Uniswap or Pancakeswap)?
How 1inch Network will save you money when trading in DeFi
A
Written by
Anastasiia Pustovoitova
Updated over a week ago
Table of contents
A common question asked is,
"Why should I use 1inch instead of a regular DEX Uniswap or Pancakeswap?"
At first glance, the interface of 1inch Network looks very similar to alot of Decentralized Exchanges (DEXes) in DeFi; however, under the hood there are some powerful features to help users save money on swaps.
Efficient routing
By design, 1inch uses a dynamic "aggregation" protocol. This differs significantly from the AMM protocols of individual DEXes. Instead of executing transactions, it finds the cheapest rate amongst a multitude of Dexes (including Uniswap and Pancakeswap), and submits the transaction through that DEX. This means that if Sushiswap has a more affordable rate than Uniswap, 1inch will do the work for you and route your swap through Sushiswap.
Transaction splitting
Transaction splitting is also another key component of how 1inch saves money for its users. If you were to make a swap on an individual DEX (like Uniswap), your trade could
only
go through one single liquidity pool. Therefore, as your trade size increases, a larger
negative price impact
will be incurred, resulting in unnecessary losses.
With 1inch, however, your single trade can be split up and routed through multiple liquidity sources! This minimizes the negative price impact and saves significant amounts of capital.
Gas optimization
In addition to efficient routing and transaction splitting, 1inch also works to optimize gas fees. 1inch Network contributors continually update the protocol to enhance gas optimization, resulting in cheaper gas fees than most leading DEXes.
Due to the protocol's efficiency, gas fees for smaller transactions are often cheaper than Uniswap, even if 1inch routes the transaction through Uniswap itself.
Fusion Mode
With
1inch Fusion
, a new 1inch swap engine is introduced for filling and executing orders. It allows users to
swap at a competitive rate without needing native tokens for gas fees
and seamlessly prevents front-running (MEV) attacks. In a general sense, it can be seen as a total overhaul of 1inch Network’s existing
Limit order
and aggregation protocols.
Similar to a Classic swap, you first enter the token amounts that you want to swap. This designates you as the "maker". Once the order is placed, resolvers (takers) compete to fill your order and also cover any associated gas fees.
With all of these unique qualities combined, anyone who uses 1inch will
save substantial amounts of capital
in comparison to using individual dexes like Uniswap or Pancakeswap.
Questions, comments, concerns? Feel free to reach out to us in the Live Support Chat!
Did this answer your question?
😞
😐
😃
Table of contents