Introduction
On this page
What is Panoptic?
Panoptic is the perpetual, oracle-free options protocol built on the Ethereum blockchain.
Introduction
​
The Panoptic protocol consists of smart contracts on the Ethereum blockchain that handle the minting, trading, and market-making of perpetual put and call options.
All smart contracts are available 24/7 and users can interact with the Panoptic protocol without the need for intermediaries like banks, brokerage firms, clearinghouses, market makers, or centralized exchanges.
Panoptic is the first permissionless options protocol that overcomes the technically challenging task of implementing an options protocol on the Ethereum blockchain.
We achieve this by embracing the decentralized nature of Automated Market Makers and permissionless liquidity providing in Uniswap.
Panoptic offers
Perpetual Option Vaults (POVs)
: automated vaults that generate yield from market volatility.
POVs wrap Panoptic’s perpetual options into simple, deposit-based strategies that allow passive users to earn returns, while active traders can interact directly through Panoptic's advanced trading interface.
The following sections will provide a brief overview of the Panoptic protocol.
How To Use Panoptic
: How to use the perpetual options trading app.
What Is Panoptic
: Understanding the Panoptic protocol.
Panoptions
: Options trading resources.
Smart Contracts
: Learn how to build on Panoptic.
Security
: Security and audit reports.
Infographics
​
Resources
​
Linktree
Developers
Litepaper
Whitepaper
10,000-Foot View of Panoptic and the DeFi Options Landscape
​
Panoptic - The Most Detailed Exposition To Date
Three Sigma: Options Series Part I - An Overview of the DeFi Options Landscape
Three Sigma: Options Series Part II - Exploring Different Pricing Approaches and Tokenomics
Join the growing community of Panoptimists and be the first to hear our latest updates by following us on our
social media platforms
.
Next
Pips — Season 3
Table of Contents
1. Introduction
2. Infographics
3. Resources
3.1. 10,000-Foot View of Panoptic and the DeFi Options Landscape