Legal
Disclaimers
Copy page
Copy page
Copy page
Copy page
The tokenized assets referenced herein (i.e. (i) the tokenized stocks, tokenized ETFs and tokenized ADRs now known as Ondo Stocks, and formerly known as Ondo tokenized stocks and ETFs, or as Ondo Global Markets tokens (collectively, the “Ondo Stocks”), (ii) USDY tokens and (iii) OUSG tokens) (collectively, the “Tokens”) have not been registered under the US Securities Act of 1933, as amended (“Act”) or the securities or financial instrument laws of any other jurisdiction. The Tokens may not be offered or sold in the United States or to US persons unless registered under the Act or an exemption from the registration requirements thereof is available. The Tokens are offered and sold in the European Economic Area and the United Kingdom solely to qualified investors, and in Switzerland solely to professional clients. Other jurisdiction-based prohibitions and restrictions apply (
Ondo Stocks
). The issuer of Tokens is not registered as an investment company under the US Investment Company Act of 1940, as amended, or as an Alternative Investment Fund or Undertaking for Collective Investment in Transferable Securities in the European Economic Area, or under the securities or financial instrument laws of any other jurisdiction.
Ondo Stocks provide their holders with economic exposure to the value of their underlying publicly traded assets, including the value of dividends (less applicable tax withholdings). However, the Tokens are not themselves stocks or ETFs, and they do not provide their holders with rights to hold or receive their respective underlying assets.
Ondo does not endorse, Ondo does not make any representation or warranty whatsoever (express or implied, including but not limited to any warranty of merchantability, fitness for a particular purpose or non-infringement) regarding, and ONDO SHALL NOT HAVE ANY LIABILITY WHATSOEVER WITH RESPECT TO ANYONE’S USE OF, any third-party products, services or technologies deployed to or accessible via Ondo Chain. Nothing herein constitutes any offer to sell, or any solicitation of an offer to buy, any assets (including any Tokens or assets that may be deployed to or accessible via Ondo Chain). Acquiring any such assets will involve risks. A holder of any such assets may incur losses, including total loss of their purchase price. Past performance may not be (and for the Tokens will not be) an indication of future results. Additional terms and conditions apply. See
docs.ondo.finance/legal/terms-of-service
,
docs.ondo.finance
and
ondo.finance/ousg
for details.
Cookies Policy
Ondo Summit 2026 Terms
x
github
Powered by
This documentation is built and hosted on Mintlify, a developer documentation platform