                                                            Pruning Processes and a New Characterization of
                                                                          Convex Geometries




arXiv:0706.3750v4 [math.CO] 31 Aug 2008
                                                                             Federico Ardila∗             Elitza Maneva†



                                                                                               Abstract
                                                        We provide a new characterization of convex geometries via a multivariate version of an
                                                    identity that was originally proved by Maneva, Mossel and Wainwright for certain combinatorial
                                                    objects arising in the context of the k-SAT problem. We thus highlight the connection between
                                                    various characterizations of convex geometries and a family of removal processes studied in the
                                                    literature on random structures.


                                          1        Introduction
                                          This article studies a general class of procedures in which the elements of a set are removed one
                                          at a time according to a given rule. We refer to such a procedure as a removal process. If every
                                          element which is removable at some stage of the process remains removable at any later stage,
                                          we call this a pruning process. The subsets that one can reach through a pruning process have
                                          the elegant combinatorial structure of a convex geometry. Our first goal is to highlight the role
                                          of convex geometries in the literature on random structures, where many pruning processes have
                                          been studied without exploiting their connection to these objects. Our second contribution is a
                                          proof that a generalization of a polynomial identity, first obtained for a specific removal process in
                                          [17], provides a new characterization of pruning processes and of convex geometries. To prove this
                                          result we also show how a convex geometry is equivalent to a particular kind of interval partition
                                          of the Boolean lattice.
                                              Two equivalent families of combinatorial objects, known as convex geometries and antimatroids,
                                          were defined in the 1980s [8, 11]. The fact that these objects can be characterized via pruning
                                          processes has been known since then. Some examples of pruning processes considered at that time
                                          are the removal of vertices of the convex hull of a set of points in Rn , the removal of the leaves of
                                          a tree, and the removal of minimal elements of a poset. More recently various pruning processes
                                          have been studied in the literature on random structures, and referred to also as peeling, stripping,
                                          whitening, coarsening, identifying, etc. A typical example is the removal of vertices of degree less
                                          than k in the process of finding the k-core of a random (hyper)graph.
                                              In [17], a surprising identity was proved to hold for a particular removal process which arises
                                          in the context of the k-SAT problem. In this paper, we answer the question posed by Mossel
                                          [23] of characterizing the combinatorial structures that satisfy (the multivariate version of) that
                                          identity: they are precisely the convex geometries or equivalently the pruning processes. That is
                                              ∗
                                                  Dept. of Mathematics, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, USA. (federico@math.sfsu.edu).
                                              †
                                                  IBM Almaden Research Center, San José, CA, USA. (enmaneva@us.ibm.com).


                                                                                                    1
the content of our main result, Theorem 3.1 and Corollary 3.2. It says that any pruning process has
the following two properties, and that in fact either of these two properties characterizes pruning
processes among removal processes.

   • Suppose there is a subset S of elements that we do not wish to remove. Then there is a
     unique minimal set τ (S) achievable by the pruning process which contains S.

   • Suppose to each element e corresponds a weight pe . For every set S reachable by the
     pruning
     Q        process, whose set of removable elements is U ⊆ S, define the weight of S to be
              Q
        ∈S pe
       e/      e∈U (1 − pe ). Then the sum of the weights of all reachable sets is 1.

    Equivalently, after appropriate rewording, either of these properties characterize convex geome-
tries among set systems.
Outline. In Section 2 we define precisely the equivalent concepts of convex geometry, antimatroid,
and pruning process. We describe a few different ways of looking at these objects: as set systems,
as languages generated by a set of circuits or pruning rules, and as lattices. These different repre-
sentations bring forward the differences between various pruning processes that have been studied.
Section 3 is devoted to our new characterization of convex geometries. Finally, in Section 4 we ap-
ply our results to the k-SAT problem and the distribution considered in [17], thereby generalizing
Theorem 6 of [17].
Related work. Antimatroids and convex geometries were first identified in the context of lattice
theory by Dilworth [7]. Since then they have appeared in a variety of combinatorial situations.
Two particularly important treatments are Edelman and Jamison’s convexity approach [8], and
Korte and Lovász’s greedoid approach [11]. Two good introductions to the subject are [3] and [12].
    Two notable examples of pruning processes on random structures appear in the analysis of
identifiable vertices in random hypergraphs [6], and of k-cores in random hypergraphs [22, 25].
Additionally, in the analysis of satisfiability problems such processes have appeared repeatedly —
most notably for the pure-literal rule algorithm for k-SAT [5, 21, 22, 26], and the study of clustering
of solutions for XOR-SAT [20] and k-SAT [1, 18].
    Pruning processes appear also in practical applications; for example in error correcting codes
such as LDPC codes [9, 16] and LT codes [14] over the erasure channel. A unified analysis of the
pruning processes in error-correcting codes and the pure-literal rule is provided in [15].
    Our work and in particular the implication 1 → 3 of our main Theorem 3.1 is related to
previous work of Aivaliotis, Gordon, and Graveman [2] and Gordon [10]. For more information on
this connection, see Section 3.1.
A word on terminology. The objects of this paper have been studied under several different
names. In particular, other authors have referred to pruning processes as shelling processes. We
prefer to avoid this name, which may lead to confusion with the other, better established notion
of shelling in combinatorics. The term “pruning” is more accurate, since a pruning process is
equivalent to the successive removal of outermost elements of a convex geometry. A good example
to keep in mind throughout the paper is the process of pruning of a tree by successively removing
its leaves.




                                                  2
2     Convex geometries and antimatroids
Convex geometries and antimatroids are equivalent families of combinatorial objects. Convex ge-
ometries provide a combinatorial abstraction of the notion of convexity. Antimatroids describe
pruning processes, where we remove elements from (or add elements to) a set one at a time, and
once an element becomes available for removal, it remains available until it is removed. There are
many equivalent definitions of these objects and a vast underlying theory [3, 12]. We now present
four points of view which we will use.

2.1   Convex sets and closure operations
A convex geometry is a pair (E, N ) where E is a set and N ⊆ 2E is a collection of subsets of E
satisfying:
(N1) E ∈ N .
(N2) If A, B ∈ N then A ∩ B ∈ N .
(N3) For every A ∈ N with A 6= E there is an x ∈   / A such that A ∪ x ∈ N .
    The sets in N are called closed or convex. It is sometimes convenient to think of N as a poset
ordered by containment; this is a lattice. We can then think of (N3) as a property of accessibility
from the top: every closed set can be obtained from E by removing one element at a time in such
a way that every intermediate set in the process is also closed.
    The closure of A ⊆ E is defined to be
                                                    \
                                       τ (A) =             C,
                                                 {C∈N : C⊇A}

which is the minimum closed set containing A. It is easy to see that τ is, in fact, a closure operator ;
that is, for all A we have A ⊆ τ (A) and τ (τ (A)) = τ (A), and for all A ⊆ B we have τ (A) ⊆ τ (B).
Also, a set A is closed if and only if τ (A) = A.

Example 2.1. For a given graph, consider the subgraphs that can be obtained by successively
removing leaves (nodes of degree 1). The vertex sets of these subgraphs are the closed sets of a
convex geometry. The minimal closed set is the 2-core of the graph. Figure 1 shows a specific graph
and its lattice of closed sets; for example, the closure of the set {a, f, g} is the set {a, c, e, f, g}.

   An extreme point of a set A is an element a ∈ A which is not in the closure of A − a. The set
ex(A) of extreme points of A is the unique minimal set whose closure is A.

2.2   Antimatroids and pruning processes
Next we define antimatroids, which are equivalent to convex geometries. Let E be a set, whose
elements we regard as letters. A word over the alphabet E is called simple if it contains no repeated
letters; let Es∗ be the set of simple words over E.
    An antimatroid is a pair (E, L) where E is a set and L ⊆ Es∗ is a set of simple words satisfying:
(L1) If αβ ∈ L then α ∈ L; that is, any beginning section of a word of L is in L.
(L2) If α, β ∈ L and |α| > |β|, then α contains a letter x such that βx ∈ L.
(L3) If α, β ∈ L and x ∈ E are such that αx, αβ ∈ L and x ∈   / β, then αβx ∈ L.



                                                   3
                                                                      abcdefg



                                                             abcefg   bcdefg    acdefg
                 b
                 11
                 00
                 11
                 00          0
                             1
                             0
                             1
                             0
                             1     d                         bcefg    acefg     cdefg
                      c
                      0
                      1
                      0
                      1   00
                          11
                          11
                          00
                          11
                          00   e
              a00
               11                                                                        defg
               00
               11
                                       11
                                       00                             cefg
                                       11
                                       00
                          00
                          11
                                            f
                          00
                          11
                            g                                                   efg


Figure 1: The set of configurations reachable by the process that successively removes leaves from
a graph. The bottom configuration is the 2-core of the graph.



    Axiom (L1) says that L is left hereditary, (L2) is an exchange axiom, and (L3) states that, as
we build up a word of L from left to right, any letter which can be added to the word at a certain
stage can still be added at any later stage.
    The supports of the words in L are called the feasible subsets of E. The feasible subsets
determine L: a word is in L if and only if every initial segment of it is a feasible set. The following
theorem provides a one-to-one correspondence between antimatroids and convex geometries.

Theorem 2.2. [12, Theorem III.1.3] Let E be a finite set and F be a collection of subsets of E.
Then F is the collection of feasible sets of an antimatroid if and only if F ∗ = {E − F : F ∈ F} is
the collection of closed sets of a convex geometry.

    By the above theorem, the feasible sets of the antimatroid corresponding to our example of a
convex geometry can be read on the descending paths from the top of the lattice of closed sets. A
letter corresponds to every edge - this is the element that is removed. Any set of removed elements
is the complement of a convex set, thus it is a feasible set. We will see below that the words of the
antimatroid can also be read on the descending paths.
    An alternative characterization of antimatroids starts by defining a set H(x) ⊆ 2E−x for every
x ∈ E, which is a collection of alternative precedences for x; each precedence is a set not containing
x. Let L be the set of words on the alphabet E such that x can only appear after at least one of
its precedences has appeared:

           L = {x1 . . . xk : for all i there is a set A ∈ H(xi ) with A ⊆ {x1 , . . . , xi−1 }.}

    In the example of Figure 1 the alternative precedences for c are {a, b}, {a, e}, and {b, e}. In
general, for the process of removing leaves to obtain the 2-core of a graph, a vertex of degree d
becomes removable as soon as d − 1 of its neighbors are removed. Thus its precedences are all the
(d − 1)-subsets of its set of d neighbors.
   A removal process is a procedure in which the elements of a set are removed one at a time
according to a given rule. If every element which is removable at some stage of the process remains
removable at any later stage, we call this a pruning process.

                                                     4
    We are now in a position to explain the correspondence between pruning processes and an-
timatroids. Given an antimatroid L on ground set E, we can consider each word w of L as a
removal sequence, which instructs us to remove the elements of w from left to right. These removal
sequences describe a pruning process: if an element x is removable at a certain stage described by
word w ∈ L (that is, if wx ∈ L), then one of the alternative precedences of x appears in w. At
any later stage the removal sequence w′ will contain w as a prefix, and therefore will contain that
alternative precedence for x as well.
    Conversely, suppose we are given a pruning process on a set E. For each element x let the
alternative precedences of x be the subsets A ⊆ E such that x is removable in E − A. Clearly the
antimatroid determined by these sets of alternative precedences consists of the removal sequences
in our pruning process.
    Example 2.1 gives rise to an antimatroid whose words are the pruning sequences of leaves that
one can successively remove from the graph. These correspond to the descending paths from the
top of the lattice of closed sets; the word indicates the elements that are being removed as we
walk down. For example the leftmost path in the lattice of Figure 1 gives the word dabc, which
corresponds to a valid order of successively removing leaves from the graph.

2.3   Circuits and Paths
The circuit description of a convex geometry is a good way to reveal the pruning process which
generates it. A rooted set is a set with a designated element called the root. Any collection of rooted
sets gives rise to a convex geometry as follows. Suppose C is a family of rooted subsets of E; label
them (Ai , ai ) where ai ∈ Ai and Ai ⊆ E. Call a subset S of E full if Ai − ai ⊆ S implies ai ∈ S for
each i; that is, if the root of a set is never the only element of the rooted set missing from S. Say a
full set S is accessible from E if there exists a sequence of full subsets E = S0 ⊃ S1 ⊃ · · · ⊃ Sk = S
with |Si − Si+1 | = 1 for each i. The following is, in a different language, Lemma 3.7 of [12].
Proposition 2.3. [12] Let C be a collection of rooted sets in E. The collection N (C) of full subsets
of E which are accessible from E is the collection of closed sets of a convex geometry on E.
    The set of rooted sets can be interpreted as pruning rules. Let for every e ∈ E, Ce = {C\{e} :
(C, e) ∈ C}). Then the corresponding pruning process is the one in which an element e is removable
if and only if at least one element has been removed from each set in Ce .
    Conversely, from a convex geometry it is possible to recover a set of rooted sets that generates
it. A free set is one of the form ex(A). A circuit is a minimal set which is not free, and one can
check that each circuit C has a unique element a which is in the closure of the remaining ones.
This element is called the root of the circuit, and (C, a) is called a rooted circuit.
    Even though we will not need this fact, let us point out that the collection of full sets of a family
of rooted sets has a nice structure.
Proposition 2.4. A collection F ⊆ 2E is the collection of full sets determined by a family of rooted
sets if and only if it contains E and is closed under intersection.
Proof. First, it is easy to see that the collection of full sets determined by a family of rooted sets
C contains E and is closed under intersection.
   Next, suppose F is a collection of subsets of E that contains E and is closed under intersection.
We start with C being the complete set of rooted sets on E. For every F ∈ F remove from C all
rooted sets (A ∪ a, a), where A ⊆ F and a ∈   / F . We claim that F is the collection of full sets of C.

                                                   5
    It is immediate by the construction that every F ∈ F is a full set. It remains to show that
there are no other full sets. Suppose D ⊆ E is a full set for C. That means that all rooted sets
(A ∪ a, a) with A ⊆ D and a ∈  / D have been removed. In particular (D ∪ a, a) has been removed
for all a ∈
          / D. This implies that for every a ∈
                                             / D there exists Fa ∈ F such that D ⊆ Fa and a ∈
                                                                                            / Fa .
Since D = ∩Fa and F is closed under intersection, D is in F.

    So far in this paper, rooted sets have played the role of circuits in a convex geometry. It is worth
pointing out, however, that one can consider rooted sets as paths which generate a convex geometry
in a different way, as follows. Suppose P is a family of rooted subsets of E which we now call paths;
label them (Pi , pi ) where pi ∈ Pi and Pi ⊆ E. Let a subset S of E be path-full if for every e ∈ S
there exists (P, e) ∈ P such that P ⊆ S. Let it be path-closed if it is path-full, and accessible from
E by a sequence E = S0 ⊃ S1 ⊃ · · · ⊃ Sk = S of path-full subsets with |Si − Si+1 | = 1 for each
i. Then the path-closed sets are the closed sets of a convex geometry, and every convex geometry
arises in this way from a set of paths.
    In this context, the rooted sets can again be interpreted as pruning rules. For every e ∈ E let
Pe = {P \{e} : (P, e) ∈ P}. Then the corresponding pruning process is the one in which an element
e is removable if and only if there is a set P ∈ Pe such that every element of P has been removed.
    The pruning processes in the literature on random structures are generated by rules for removing
elements which can usually be represented in a natural way through circuits or paths. While both
points of view are equivalent, sometimes one is more natural than the other. For example, in finding
the k-core of a graph [25], a vertex becomes removable when at least one element has been removed
from every k-subset of its neighbors (circuit rule). On the other hand, in the case of identifiable
vertices in hypergraphs [6] a vertex is removable if, in at least one of the hyperedges in which it
appears, every other vertex has been removed (path rule).
    In the rest of the paper, all the rooted sets that appear play the role of circuits.

2.4   Lattices
Finally, we can also think of convex geometries as meet-distributive lattices. A lattice L is meet-
distributive if for any element x 6= b0 the interval [m(x), x] is a Boolean lattice, where m(x) is the
meet of the elements covered by x. Meet-distributive lattices are precisely the posets of closed sets
of convex geometries. [3, Prop. 8.7.5]
    One might wonder whether something more specific can be said about the convex geometries
that arise from a set of circuits each of size at most k. This question will be particularly natural
in Section 4, where convex geometries are applied to the k-SAT problem for a fixed value of k.
    For k = 2 the situation is very nice. Recall that a lattice L is distributive if x ∧ (y ∨ z) =
(x ∧ y) ∨ (x ∧ z) for any x, y, z in L.

Proposition 2.5. [12, Cor. 3.10] Let C be a set of rooted sets of size 2. The convex geometry
N (C) generated by these sets is a distributive lattice. Conversely, every distributive lattice arises
in this way.

   For higher values of k, if we start with a collection C of rooted circuits of size k, the resulting
convex geometry N generally has additional rooted circuits of different sizes. For the case of
k = 2, all circuits of the generated convex geometry have size 2. However, for example, the convex
geometry defined by the rooted 3-sets (abc, b) and (bde, d) also has (acde, d) as a circuit.


                                                   6
    If we have a bound on the size of the circuits of a convex geometry, we can make the following
statement. A lattice L is k-distributive if x ∧ (y0 ∨ · · · ∨ yk ) = (x ∧ y0 ) ∨ · · · ∨ (x ∧ yk ) for any
x, y0 , . . . , yk in L.

Proposition 2.6. [13, Cor. 4.3.] Let k ≥ 3 be an integer. If all circuits of a convex geometry
have size at most k, then its poset of closed sets is a (k − 1)-distributive lattice. Not every (k − 1)-
distributive lattice arises in this way.


3     Convex geometries as interval partitions of Boolean lattices
In this section we describe our new characterization of convex geometries. We show that convex
geometries on a set E are characterized by the fact that they induce a certain partition of the
Boolean lattice 2E . This partition is encoded in a polynomial identity which, as we will later see,
generalizes Theorem 4.2 from [17].
    For any collection N ⊆ 2E of subsets of E, and a set A in N , say that an element a ∈ A is
excludable from A if A − a is in N . Let ex(A) be the set of excludable elements of A. When N is
the collection of closed sets of a convex geometry, ex(A) is the set of extreme points of A.

Theorem 3.1. Let N ⊆ 2E be a collection of subsets of a non-empty set E. The following
statements are equivalent:

    1. N is the collection of closed sets of a convex geometry.

    2. As A ranges over N the intervals [ex(A), A] partition the Boolean lattice 2E ; that is, for every
       D ⊆ E there is a unique A ∈ N such that ex(A) ⊆ D ⊆ A.

    3. For any collection of pi and qi for i ∈ E such that pi + qi = 1 for all i, we have
                                          X Y          Y
                                                   pi        qj = 1.
                                          A∈N     ∈A
                                                 i/     j∈ex(A)


Proof. 1. implies 2. Notice that if A ∈ N is such that ex(A) ⊆ D ⊆ A, then we have that
A = τ (ex(A)) ⊆ τ (D) ⊆ τ (A) = A; so the only possible choice for A is A = τ (D). It remains
to notice that, since ex(A) is the unique minimal set such that A = τ (ex(A)), and A = τ (D), it
follows that D ⊇ ex(A), and therefore D ∈ [ex(A), A].
2. implies 1. We define the map φ : 2E → N , as follows: for every D ⊆ E, let φ(D) be the
unique element A ∈ N such that ex(A) ⊆ D ⊆ A. We need to show axioms (N1)-(N3) of a convex
geometry (E, N ): E is in N , N is closed under intersection, and every A ∈ N is accessible from E.
    Axiom (N1) obviously holds, because φ(E) = E is in N . To show (N3), we show that every set
A ∈ N is accessible from any superset B ⊇ A that also belongs to N . It suffices to prove that there
exists an element of B\A that is excludable from B. If that were not the case, then ex(B) ⊆ A,
and both of the intervals [ex(A), A] and [ex(B), B] would contain A, a contradiction.
    Finally, we need to prove (N2), which states that N is closed under intersection. First we prove
the following statement:
                       If B ∈ N and A ⊆ B then φ(A) ⊆ B.
    Suppose that we remove one element at a time from B in any arbitrary way, with the restriction
that the intermediate sets in the process must all be in N and contain A. We keep doing this until

                                                    7
we cannot continue anymore; suppose the set we obtain is C; by construction, B ⊇ C ⊇ A. That
means that every element excludable from C is in A, so ex(C) ⊆ A ⊆ C. Thus C = φ(A) and we
obtain the desired statement.
   Now suppose A1 and A2 are in N . From A1 ∩ A2 ⊆ A1 we obtain that φ(A1 ∩ A2 ) ⊆ A1 .
Similarly φ(A1 ∩ A2 ) ⊆ A2 , so φ(A1 ∩ A2 ) ⊆ A1 ∩ A2 . But the reverse inclusion holds by definition,
so we must have equality. It follows that A1 ∩ A2 is in N .
2. implies 3. Observe that
                                X Y Y               Y
                                        pi     qj =     (ph + qh ) = 1.
                                    D⊆E i6∈D        j∈D            h∈E

Therefore, since for every D there is a unique A such that ex(A) ⊆ D ⊆ A, it suffices to prove that
for every A ∈ N :            Y       Y            X       Y Y
                                pi        qj =                pi   qj .
                                    ∈A
                                   i/     j∈ex(A)           D∈[ex(A),A] i6∈D          j∈D

   This is easily seen to be true because:
                                                                                                                    
             X        Y           Y            Y            Y                 X               Y               Y
                             pi         qj =          pi             qj                                 pi         qj 
          D∈[ex(A),A] i6∈D        j∈D          i6∈A        j∈ex(A)        R⊆A\ex(A)      i∈A\(ex(A)∪R)        j∈R
                                               Y            Y                 Y
                                          =           pi             qj               (ph + qh )
                                               i6∈A        j∈ex(A)        h∈A\ex(A)
                                               Y            Y
                                          =           pi             qj .
                                               i6∈A        j∈ex(A)

3. implies 2. Consider any set D ⊆ E, and let pa = 0 if a ∈ D and pa = 1 otherwise. The equality
becomes:
                                        X Y            Y
                                 1 =              pi        qj
                                                      A∈N       ∈A
                                                               i/           j∈ex(A)
                                                               X
                                               =                                1
                                                      A∈N : ex(A)⊆D⊆A

Therefore there is exactly one set A ∈ N for which ex(A) ⊆ D ⊆ A.
   The following corollary gives a characterization of pruning processes among removal processes:
Corollary 3.2. A removal process on a set E is a pruning process if and only if, for each subset S
of E, there is a unique minimal set τ (S) containing S which is achievable by the removal process.
Proof. As outlined in Section 2.2, a pruning process gives rise to a convex geometry, and in that case
τ (S) is just the convex closure of S. For the other direction, let N consist of the sets achievable
by the removal process; it suffices to show that N is the collection of closed sets of a convex
geometry. We will show that property 2 of Theorem 3.1 holds. For any set S ⊆ E, it holds that
ex(τ (S)) ⊆ S ⊆ τ (S), because if there is an excludable element of τ (S) that is not in S, then τ (S)
would not be the minimal set containing S. Furthermore, any set T ∈ N for which ex(T ) ⊆ S ⊆ T
is a minimal set containing S because all of its excludable elements are in S. Since there is a unique
such set, it is τ (S).
   We conclude this section by offering a probabilistic interpretation of property 3 of Theorem 3.1.

                                                               8
3.1   A probabilistic interpretation
Let (E, N ) be a convex geometry, and fix 0 ≤ pe , qe ≤ 1 with pe + qe = 1 for each element e of E.
Define a probability distribution π1 on the subsets of E by independently deleting element e with
probability pe and keeping it with probability qe :
                                          Y Y
                                 Pr(A) =     pi     qj ,   A ⊆ E.
                                 π1
                                             ∈A
                                            i/     j∈A

Define a probability distribution π2 on the convex sets of E by:
                                         Y      Y
                                Pr(A) =     pi       qj ,   A ∈ N.
                                π2
                                            ∈A
                                           i/     j∈ex(A)

The implication 1 → 3 of Theorem 3.1 tells us that π2 is, indeed, a probability distribution.
Furthermore, in order to sample from π2 , it suffices to sample from π1 and compute the closure of
the obtained set.

Theorem 3.3. Let f (A) be a function defined on the subsets A of E which depends only on τ (A).
Then the expected value of f when we sample from the distribution π1 on all subsets of E, equals
the expected value of f when we sample from the distribution π2 on the convex sets of E.

Proof. Assuming that f (D) = f (τ (D)), the identity
                      X           Y Y             X                 Y           Y
                           f (D)     pi     qj =            f (A)         pi             qj .    (1)
                       D⊆E            ∈D
                                     i/    j∈D        A∈N            ∈A
                                                                    i/         j∈ex(A)

can be established in exactly the same way as implication 1 → 3 of Theorem 3.1.

    We note that Aivaliotis, Gordon, and Graveman [2] and Gordon [10] studied the problem of
choosing a random subset of a convex geometry under the distribution π1 . They related the
expected rank of this random subset to the Tutte polynomial of the antimatroid. In particular,
they discovered (1) in a special case which is no simpler than the general case.
    The fact that π2 is a probability distribution on N is not explicitly stated in [2] or [10], and
neither is the probabilistic interpretation of the right hand side of (1). However, these two results
follow very easily from that work. Our theorem that the probabilistic property of Theorem 3.3 (or
the weaker condition 3 of Theorem 3.1) characterizes convex geometries is new.


4     Convex geometries in the k-SAT problem
Let F be a Boolean formula such as

                                F = (x̄1 ∨ x̄2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ x̄3 ∨ x̄4 ).

We can assume that F is written in conjunctive normal form as a conjunction of certain clauses C
in the variables V and their negations. The Boolean satisfiability problem (SAT) is to determine
whether there is some assignment of TRUE (1) and FALSE (0) to the variables which makes the
entire formula true. The k-SAT problem is the same problem when restricted to formulas with


                                                     9
clauses of a fixed size k. For k = 2 there is a polynomial time algorithm for deciding satisfiability,
however for k ≥ 3 the problem is NP-complete.
    In their analysis of the Survey Propagation algorithm [19, 4] for 3-SAT, Maneva et al [17]
discovered a polynomial identity that holds for any SAT problem and any satisfying assignment.
To define this identity first we need to introduce the concept of partial assignments, where to each
variable is assigned one of the values 0, 1, or ∗; the value ∗ indicates that a variable is unassigned and
free to take either value. Say that a partial assignment x is invalid for a clause C if plugging x into C
gives either 0∨0∨· · ·∨0 (which makes the clause invalid) or 0∨· · ·∨0∨∗∨0∨· · ·∨0 (where the ∗ is not
free to take either value). A partial assignment x is valid for a formula if it is valid for all its clauses.
For example, some valid partial assignments for the formula F = (x̄1 ∨ x̄2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ x̄3 ∨ x̄4 )
are (1, 1, 1, 1), (∗, 1, ∗, ∗) and (1, ∗, ∗, 1), and some invalid partial assignments are (1, 1, 0, ∗) and
(∗, ∗, 1, 1).
Definition 4.1. Given a Boolean formula F , the poset P (F ) of valid partial assignments is defined
by decreeing that a covers b if b is obtained from a by switching a 0 or 1 to a ∗.
    Figure 2 shows part of the poset of valid partial assignments for the formula F above. Note that
in this example, somewhat surprisingly, (1, 1, 1, 1) is not greater than (1, ∗, ∗, 1) in P (F ), because
to stay valid one must switch x2 and x3 from 1 to ∗ simultaneously: (1, ∗, 1, 1) and (1, 1, ∗, 1) are
invalid.

                             0111                      1111                          1010
                                                   1              4

                                                *111              111*
                                               3     4        1          2

                                        *1*1           *11*               1*1*
                                    2          4      3     2            1     3

                                 ***1          *1**               **1*        1***
                                           4           2      3      1

                                                       ****


Figure 2: Some of the valid partial assignments for the formula (x̄1 ∨ x̄2 ∨ x3 ) ∧ (x2 ∨ x̄3 ∨ x̄4 ).
Highlighted are the assignments below the satisfying assignment (1, 1, 1, 1). Edges are labeled with
the index of the variable whose value differs in the two adjacent assignments.


    Definition 4.1 suggests that, given a valid partial assignment a, we call a coordinate i either:
(a) a star ∗,
(b) unconstrained if ai ∈ {0, 1} and setting ai = ∗ keeps the assignment valid, or
(c) constrained if ai ∈ {0, 1} and setting ai = ∗ gives an invalid assignment; that is, if ai is the only
satisfying variable in some clause of F .
Let S(a), U (a), C(a), and N (a) be the sets of star, unconstrained, constrained, and numerical
variables of a, respectively; so V = S(a) ∪ N (a) and N (a) = U (a) ∪ C(a).
    Maneva et al [17] defined the weight of a partial assignment a to be
                                               W (a) = p|S(a)| q |U (a)| ,

                                                              10
where p and q are parameters in the interval [0, 1]. They considered the probability distribution
which assigns to a a probability proportional to W (a) for every valid partial assignment a. The
survey propagation algorithm was then proved to be equivalent to applying the belief propagation
marginalization heuristic [24] to this distribution with suitably chosen p and q. This distribution
has the following property, which should not look surprising in view of Theorem 3.1:

Theorem 4.2. [17] For any satisfying assignment a of a Boolean formula F and p + q = 1,
                                    X
                                        p|S(b)| q |U (b)| = 1,
                                       b≤a

summing over all valid partial assignments b which are less than a in P (F ); that is, summing over
the subposet P (F )≤a.

    Thus the probability distribution on partial assignments with p > 0 may be regarded as a
“smoother” version of the uniform distribution over satisfying assignments, which corresponds to
the case p = 0: if we choose a valid partial assignment b at random, then the probability of being
under a is the same for any satisfying assignment a. Another consequence of the above theorem
is that if the total weight of all valid partial assignments is less than 1, then the formula has no
satisfying assignment. In recent work of Sinclair and the second author [18], this fact was used in
conjunction with the first-moment method to bound the probability of satisfiability of a random
SAT formula with clauses of sizes 2 and 3.
   Consider the following experiment:
   1. in a valid assignment a, change a random unconstrained variable to ∗, and
   2. repeat until there are no unconstrained variables.
This procedure has been referred to as “peeling”, “whitening”, “coarsening” and “pruning”. We
now recognize it as a pruning process on the set of variables which have numerical values in a. At
each stage, we are allowed to remove an unconstrained variable; notice that if a variable becomes
unconstrained, it remains unconstrained throughout this process.
   This experiment is equivalent to taking a random path from x down the partial order P (F ), by
choosing at each step a random partial assignment that is covered by the current one. For a fixed
choice of a, any such path terminates at the same partial assignment, which is known as a “core”.
(Note, however, that different a may lead to different core assignments.)
   Achlioptas and Ricci-Tersenghi [1] examined the above pruning process and proved that, for
k ≥ 9 and a formula chosen from a particular distribution of interest, there is a high probability
that the process will terminate before removing all variables. This is not known to hold for k = 3.
   With the above description of the removal process, our next result follows easily.

Theorem 4.3. Let F be a SAT formula with variables V , and let a be a valid (possibly partial)
assignment for F . Let

                  N = {N (b) : b is a valid partial assignment such that b ≤ a}.

Then (N (a), N ) is a convex geometry. Conversely, every convex geometry arises in this way from
a valid assignment for a SAT formula.



                                                11
Proof. We show that this statement is equivalent to Proposition 2.3. Consider the clauses of F
with a unique satisfying variable in a, which give 0 ∨ · · · ∨ 0 ∨ 1 ∨ 0 ∨ · · · ∨ 0 when we plug a into
them. If C is the set of variables in such a clause (which must be a subset of N (a)) and v is the
unique satisfying variable, form a rooted set (C, v). Then (N (a), N ) is clearly the convex geometry
generated by these rooted sets. Conversely, given a convex geometry, one can encode its rooted
sets into the clauses of a SAT formula with a valid assignment.

    The convex geometry corresponding to assignment (1, 1, 1, 1) in Figure 2 is the collection of sets
of assigned variables in assignments lying below (1, 1, 1, 1):

               {{1, 2, 3, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3}, {2, 4}, {2, 3}, {1, 3}, {4}, {2}, {3}, {1}, ∅}

and the words of the corresponding antimatroid can be read out by going down the directed edges;
the feasible sets are:

          {∅, {1}, {4}, {1, 3}, {1, 4}, {2, 4}, {1, 2, 3}, {1, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 4}, {2, 3, 4}, {1, 2, 3, 4}}

    In the particular case of 2-SAT, the convex geometry is very special. By Proposition 2.5, the
poset P (F )≤a of valid partial assignments is a distributive lattice.
    Notice that a SAT formula F generally has several different valid partial assignments, and
each assignment a gives rise to a convex geometry G(F, a). These different convex geometries fit
together nicely, as seen in Figure 2. If G(F, a) and G(F, b) have a non-empty intersection, then
their intersection is the convex geometry G(F, c) for the unique element c with maximal N (c) for
which ci = ∗ if ai 6= bi , and ci = ai = bi otherwise.
    The machinery that we have built up now provides a more illustrative multivariate version of
Maneva, Mossel, and Wainwright’s Theorem 4.2 on the probability distribution determined by a
SAT problem F and a valid assignment a. More importantly, in view of Theorem 3.1, it tells us
that the identity of Theorem 4.2 holds precisely because a SAT problem gives rise to a convex
geometry. Therefore convex geometries are really the context in which this identity should be
understood.
Theorem 4.4. For a valid partial assignment b of a Boolean formula F with variables V , let
S(b), U (b) and C(b) denote the sets of star, unconstrained, and constrained variables of b in F ,
respectively. Let pi and qi be such that pi + qi = 1 for all i ∈ V . Then, for any valid assignment a
of a Boolean formula F ,              X Y            Y
                                                 pi       qj = 1
                                          b≤a i∈S(b)     j∈U (b)

summing over all valid assignments b which are less than a in P (F ).
Proof. The result follows directly from Theorems 3.1 and 4.3.



5    Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Elchanan Mossel for posing the question of characterizing the combinatorial
objects satisfying Theorem 4.2, and Laci Lovász and Martin Wainwright for helpful discussions.
We would also like to thank the referee for very useful suggestions for improving the exposition.

                                                        12
References
 [1] D. Achlioptas and F. Ricci-Tersenghi. On the solution-space geometry of random constraint
     satisfaction problems. In Proc. 38th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 2006.
 [2] M. Aivaliotis, G. Gordon, and W. Graveman. When bad things happen to good trees. J.
     Graph Theory, 37:79–99, 2001.
 [3] A. Björner and G. Ziegler. Introduction to greedoids. In N. White, editor, Matroid applications,
     pages 284–354. Cambridge University Press, 1992.
 [4] A. Braunstein, M. Mézard, and R. Zecchina. Survey propagation: an algorithm for satisfiabil-
     ity. Random Structures and Algorithms, 27:201–226, 2005.
 [5] A. Z. Broder, A. M. Frieze, and E. Upfal. On the satisfiability and maximum satisfiability of
     random 3-cnf formulas. In Proc. 4th ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, pages 322–330,
     1993.
 [6] R.W.R. Darling and J.R. Norris. Structure of large random hypergraphs. Annals of Applied
     Probability, 15:125–152, 2005.
 [7] R.P. Dilworth. Lattices with unique irreducible decompositions. Ann. Math., 41:771–777,
     1940.
 [8] P.H. Edelman and R. Jamison. The theory of convex geometries. Geom. Dedicata, 19:247–274,
     1985.
 [9] R. G. Gallager. Low-density parity check codes. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[10] G. Gordon. Expected rank in antimatroids. Adv. in Applied Math., 32:299–318, 2004.
[11] B. Korte and L. Lovász. Shelling structures, convexity and a happy end. In B. Bolobás, editor,
     Graph theory and combinatorics, Proceedings of the Cambridge Combinatorial Conference in
     Honor of Paul Erdös., pages 219–232. Academic Press, London, UK, 1984.
[12] B. Korte, L. Lovász, and R. Schrader. Greedoids. Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 1991.
[13] L. Libkin. n-distributivity, dimension and Carathéodory’s theorem. Algebra Universalis, 34:72–
     95, 1995.
[14] M. Luby. LT codes. In Proc. 42nd IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science, pages
     271–282, 2002.
[15] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, and M. A. Shokrollahi. Analysis of random processes via AND-OR
     tree evaluation. In Proc. 9th ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, pages 364–373, 1998.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M.A. Shokrollahi, D.A. Spielman, and V. Stemann. Practical
     loss-resilient codes. In Proc. 29th ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, pages 150–159, 1997.
[17] E. Maneva, E. Mossel, and M. J. Wainwright. A new look at Survey Propagation and its
     generalizations. J. ACM, 55:2–41, 2007. Extended abstract appeared in Proc. 16th ACM-
     SIAM Symp. on Discrete Algorithms, 2005, pp.1089–1098.

                                                 13
[18] E. Maneva and A. Sinclair. On the satisfiability threshold and clustering of solutions of random
     3-SAT formulas. Theoretical Computer Science, 2008. To appear.

[19] M. Mézard, G. Parisi, and R. Zecchina. Analytic and algorithmic solution of random satis-
     fiability problems. Science, 297, 812, 2002. (Scienceexpress published on-line 27-June-2002;
     10.1126/science.1073287).

[20] M. Mézard, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and R. Zecchina. Two solutions to diluted p-spin models and
     XORSAT problems. J. Stat. Phys., 111:505, 2003.

[21] M. Mitzenmacher. Tight thresholds for the pure literal rule. Technical Report 1997-011,
     DEC/SRC, 1997.

[22] M. Molloy. The pure literal rule threshold and cores in random hypergraphs. In Proc. 15th
     ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, pages 672–681, 2004.

[23] E. Mossel. Personal communication, 2004.

[24] J. Pearl. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: networks of plausible inference. Morgan
     Kaufmann, Palo Alto, CA, 1988.

[25] B. Pittel, J. Spencer, and N. Wormald. Sudden emergence of a giant k-core in a random graph.
     J. of Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 67:111–151, 1996.

[26] J.W. Rosenthal, J.M. Plotkin, and J. Franco. The probability of pure literals. Journal of
     Computational Logic, 9:501–513, 1999.




                                                 14
