Compound III Documentation
Compound III
Interest Rates
Collateral & Borrowing
Liquidation
Account Management
Protocol Rewards
Governance
Helper Functions
Introduction
Networks
Protocol Contracts
Developer Resources
Security
Compound III
Introduction
Compound III
is an EVM compatible protocol that enables supplying of crypto assets as collateral in order to borrow the
base asset
. Accounts can also earn interest by supplying the base asset to the protocol.
The initial deployment of Compound III is on Ethereum and the base asset is USDC.
Please join the
#development
room in the Compound community
Discord
server as well as the forums at
comp.xyz
; Compound Labs and members of the community look forward to helping you build an application on top of Compound III. Your questions help us improve, so please don’t hesitate to ask if you can’t find what you are looking for here.
For documentation of the Compound v2 Protocol, see
docs.compound.finance/v2
.
Networks
The network deployment artifacts with contract addresses are available in the
Comet
repository
deployments/
folder.
The v3 proxy is the only address to be used to interact with a Compound III instance. It is the first address listed in each of the tabs below. To generate the proper
Comet Interface ABI
(
CometInterface.sol
), compile the Comet project using
yarn compile
.
Note:
The deployment data shown below is sourced from the
compound-docs-aggregator
repository. Data collected on:
2026-02-28 12:34:36.611 UTC
.
Protocol Contracts
cUSDCv3
This is the main proxy contract for interacting with the first Compound III market. The address is fixed and independent from future upgrades to the market. It is an
OpenZeppelin TransparentUpgradeableProxy contract
.
cUSDCv3 Implementation
This is the implementation of the market logic contract, as deployed by the Comet Factory via the Configurator.
Do not interact with this contract directly; instead use the cUSDCv3 proxy address with the Comet Interface ABI.
cUSDCv3 Ext
This is an extension of the market logic contract which supports some auxiliary/independent interfaces for the protocol. This is used to add additional functionality without requiring contract space in the main protocol contract.
Do not interact with this contract directly; instead use the cUSDCv3 proxy address with the Comet Interface ABI.
Configurator
This is a
proxy
contract for the
configurator
, which is used to set and update parameters of a Comet proxy contract. The configurator deploys implementations of the Comet logic contract according to its configuration. This pattern allows significant gas savings for users of the protocol by ‘constantizing’ the parameters of the protocol.
Configurator Implementation
This is the implementation of the Configurator contract, which can also be upgraded to support unforeseen changes to the protocol.
Proxy Admin
This is the admin of the Comet and Configurator proxy contracts. It is a
ProxyAdmin
as recommended/implemented by OpenZeppelin according to their upgradeability pattern.
Comet Factory
This is the factory contract capable of producing instances of the Comet implementation/logic contract, and invoked by the Configurator.
Rewards
This is a rewards contract which can hold rewards tokens (e.g. COMP, WETH) and allows claiming rewards by users, according to the core protocol tracking indices.
Bulker
This is an external contract that is not integral to Comet’s function. It allows accounts to bulk multiple operations into a single transaction. This is a useful contract for Compound III user interfaces. The following is an example of steps in a bulked transaction.
Wrap Ether to WETH
Supply WETH collateral
Supply WBTC collateral
Borrow USDC
In addition to supplying, borrowing, and wrapping, the bulker contract can also transfer collateral within the protocol and claim rewards.
Developer Resources
The following developer guides and code repositories serve as resources for community members building on Compound. They detail the protocol deployment process, construction of new features, and code examples for implementing external apps that depend on Compound III as infrastructure.
Compound III Developer FAQ
Scenarios, Migrations, and Workflows
Creating a Compound III Liquidator
Building a Comet Extension
Security
The security of the Compound protocol is our highest priority; our development team, alongside third-party auditors and consultants, has invested considerable effort to create a protocol that we believe is safe and dependable. All contract code and balances are publicly verifiable, and security researchers are eligible for a bug bounty for reporting undiscovered vulnerabilities.
We believe that size, visibility, and time are the true test for the security of a smart contract; please exercise caution, and make your own determination of security and suitability.
Audits
The Compound protocol has been reviewed & audited by
OpenZeppelin
and
ChainSecurity
.
Compound III Audit by OpenZeppelin
Compound III Security Audit by ChainSecurity
