Janus Henderson Anemoy AAA CLO Fund (JAAA) | Anemoy Janus Henderson Anemoy AAA CLO Fund (JAAA) The world’s largest AAA CLO strategy, tokenized on Centrifuge. Get Access View Full Data Strategic Partners FEATURES Institutional Credit. Onchain Access The tokenized Janus Henderson Anemoy AAA CLO Fund (JAAA) brings a historically exclusive strategy into the blockchain era, offering investors risk-managed income, strong credit protection, and low duration risk through an actively managed portfolio of AAA-rated CLO tranches. Tokens issued natively on supported chains Subscriptions & redemptions in stablecoins Regulated open-ended BVI fund for non-US professional investors Transparent onchain NAV reporting Attractive, Risk-Managed Yield Strong income potential with a superior risk profile that outperforms many similarly rated fixed-income assets. Backed by robust structural protections and decades of real-world performance, JAAA offers compelling returns without compromising on credit quality. 5.8% AAA Collateralized Loan Obligations Real Portfolio Diversification JAAA brings unique diversification benefits to both fixed income and multi-asset portfolios. Its structure and composition make it less sensitive to broader market volatility, helping investors reduce correlation and improve return stability. * Historical correlation (CLOs display low combined correlation to equities and fixed income) partners Janus Henderson’s Loan & Credit Expertise Managed by Janus Henderson’s securitized-credit specialists, the fund offers onchain investors a professionally curated mix of senior CLO tranches that spans hundreds of underlying loans and multiple industries—delivering instant, institution-grade diversification in a single allocation. “We’ve been incredibly impressed with the strong early traction from our first collaboration on JTRSY. When Grove approached us to bring our flagship AAA CLO fund onchain, Centrifuge and Anemoy were the clear partners... ...With JAAA, we’re taking the next step: bringing a complex, actively managed credit strategy fully into the onchain economy." Nick Cherney Head of Innovation at Janus Henderson Fixed Income, Re-engineered Onchain Lower friction and operating costs Multichain investor support Programmable compliance Daily access and settlement Enhanced transparency High Quality Access JAAA opens access to AAA-rated CLOs, an asset class historically limited to institutional investors, delivered with the cost-efficiency, transparency, and daily liquidity typically found in ETF structures. Disciplined Process The fund is managed with a rigorous due diligence and portfolio construction framework, aiming to deliver consistent risk-adjusted returns with low correlation to traditional fixed income markets. Experienced team JAAA is managed by a Team of senior portfolio managers with over 60 years of combined experience, backed by Janus Henderson’s Global Securitized Credit platform overseeing $36.4B in assets (as of September 30, 2024). Capital Partners “Our vision for Grove is to be the infrastructure that bridges capital between traditional and decentralized finance, and this collaboration is a major milestone on that journey,... ...I’ve worked closely with the Centrifuge team for many years, including during my time at BlockTower, and have a deep appreciation for their technical rigor and commitment to building the tokenized CLO market. Partnering with Janus Henderson and Anemoy to bring a flagship strategy like JAAA onchain represents the next evolution of this space.” Kevin Chan Co-founder of Grove “Centrifuge and Anemoy have been the original pioneer of RWAs and continue to lead with institutional-grade assets and infrastructure,... ...Sky is focused on remaining the largest allocator to RWAs in DeFi to accelerate the adoption of traditional finance onchain and grow long-term revenue for the Sky ecosystem. This collaboration exemplifies that strategy in action.” Rune Christensen Founder of Sky “Our vision for Grove is to be the infrastructure that bridges capital between traditional and decentralized finance, and this collaboration is a major milestone on that journey,... ...I’ve worked closely with the Centrifuge team for many years, including during my time at BlockTower, and have a deep appreciation for their technical rigor and commitment to building the tokenized CLO market. Partnering with Janus Henderson and Anemoy to bring a flagship strategy like JAAA onchain represents the next evolution of this space.” Kevin Chan Co-founder of Grove “Centrifuge and Anemoy have been the original pioneer of RWAs and continue to lead with institutional-grade assets and infrastructure,... ...Sky is focused on remaining the largest allocator to RWAs in DeFi to accelerate the adoption of traditional finance onchain and grow long-term revenue for the Sky ecosystem. This collaboration exemplifies that strategy in action.” Rune Christensen Founder of Sky Get Access Anemoy brings institutional-grade investment opportunities seamlessly onchain in a safe, reliable and compliant way. Contact us to get access. © 2025 Anemoy Limited. All rights reserved. Business Continuity Privacy
